or the presence of irritating chemicals. The central axonal processes of these dorsal root ganglion neurons terminate on second-order neurons and local interneurons in the dorsal horn and on intermediate gray regions of the spinal cord. Some primary visceral sensory axons terminate near the lateral horn, where the preganglionic neurons of sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions are located; these terminals mediate visceral reflex activity in a manner not unlike the segmental somatic motor reflexes described in Chapter 15.In the dorsal horn, many of the second-order neurons that receive visceral sensory inputs are actually neurons of the anterolateral system, which also receive nociceptive and/or crude mechanosensory input from more superficial sources (see Chapter 9). As described in Box A of Chapter 9, this is one means by which painful visceral sensations may be "referred" to more superficial somatic territories. Axons of these second-order visceral sensory neurons travel rostrally in the ventrolateral white matter of the spinal cord and the lateral sector of the brainstem and eventually reach the ventral posterior complex of the thalamus. However, the axons of other second-order visceral sensory neurons terminate before reaching the thalamus; the principal target of these axons is the nucleus of the solitary tract In the last decade, it has become clear that visceral sensory information, especially axons related to painful visceral sensations, also ascends the central nervous system by another spinal pathway. Second-order neurons whose cell bodies are located near the central canal of the spinal cord send their axons through the dorsal columns to terminate in the dorsal column nuclei, where third-order neurons relay visceral nociceptive signals to the ventral posterior thalamus. Although the existence of this visceral pain pathway in the dorsal columns complicates the simplistic view of the dorsal column-medial lemniscal pathway as a discriminitive mechanosensory projection and the anterolateral system as a pain pathway, mounting empirical and clinical evidence highlights the importance of this newly discovered dorsal column pain pathway in the central transmission of visceral nociception (see Box B in Chapter 9).In addition to these spinal visceral afferents, general visceral sensory inputs from thoracic and upper abdominal organs, as well as from viscera in the head and neck, enter the brainstem directly via the glossopharyngeal and vagus cranial nerves (see Finally, unlike the somatic sensory system (where virtually all sensory signals gain access to conscious neural processing), sensory fibers related to the viscera convey only limited information to consciousness. For example, most of us are completely unaware of the subtle changes in peripheral vascular resistance that raise or lower our mean arterial blood pressure, yet such covert visceral afferent information is essential for the functioning of autonomic reflexes and the maintenance of homeostasis. Typically, it is only painful visceral sensations and signals that are integrated into emotional experience and expression (see Chapter 28) that enter conscious awareness. The hypothalamus is located at the base of the forebrain, bounded by the optic chiasm rostrally and the midbrain tegmentum caudally. It forms the floor and ventral walls of the third ventricle and is continuous through the infundibular stalk with the posterior pituitary gland, as illustrated in What is surprising about this structure is the remarkable diversity of homeostatic functions that are governed by this relatively small region of the forebrain. The diverse functions in which hypothalamic involvement is at least partially understood include: the control of blood flow (by promoting adjustments in cardiac output, vasomotor tone, blood osmolarity, and renal clearance, and by motivating drinking and salt consumption); the regulation of energy metabolism (by monitoring blood glucose levels and regulating feeding behavior, digestive functions, metabolic rate, and temperature); the regulation of reproductive activity (by influencing gender identity, sexual orientation and mating behavior and, in females, by governing menstrual cycles, pregnancy, and lactation); and the coordination of responses to threatening conditions (by governing the release of stress hormones, modulating the balance between sympathetic and parasympathetic tone, and influencing the regional distribution of blood flow).Despite the impressive scope of hypothalamic control, the individual components of the hypothalamus utilize similar physiological mechanisms to exert their influence over these many functions The medial-tuberal region nuclei ("tuberal" refers to the tuber cinereum, the anatomical name given to the middle portion of the inferior surface of the hypothalamus) include the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei, which contain the neurosecretory neurons whose axons extend into the posterior pituitary. With appropriate stimulation, these neurons secrete oxytocin or vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) directly into the bloodstream. Other neurons in the paraventricular nucleus project to autonomic centers in the reticular formation, as well as preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions in the higher integrative centers in the amygdala (specifically, the central group of amygdaloid nuclei; see Box B in Chapter 28) and hypothalamus (see Box A and below). In addition, the nucleus of the solitary tract projects to the parabrachial nucleus (so named because it envelopes the superior cerebellar peduncle, which is also known by its Latin name, the brachium conjunctivum). The parabrachial nucleus, in turn, provides additional visceral sensory relays to the hypothalamus, amygdala, thalamus, and medial prefrontal and insular cortex (see A key component of this central autonomic network that deserves special consideration is the hypothalamus. This heterogeneous collection of nuclei in the base of the diencephalon serves as the major center for the coordination and expression of visceral motor activity (Box A). The major outflow from the relevant hypothalamic nuclei is directed toward "autonomic centers" in the reticular formation; these centers can be thought of as dedicated premotor circuits that coordinate the efferent activity of preganglionic visceral motor neurons. They organize specific visceral functions such as cardiac reflexes,The Hypothalamus (continued) brainstem and spinal cord; these cells are thought to exert hypothalamic control over the visceral motor system. The paraventricular nucleus receives inputs from other hypothalamic zones, which are in turn related to the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, and other central structures that are all capable of influencing visceral motor function.Also in the region of the hypothalamus are the dorsomedial and ventromedial nuclei, which are involved in feeding, reproductive and parenting behavior, thermoregulation, and water balance. These nuclei receive inputs from structures of the limbic system, as well as from visceral sensory nuclei in the brainstem (e.g., the nucleus of the solitary tract).Finally, the lateral region of the hypothalamus is really a rostral continuation of the midbrain reticular formation (see Box A in Chapter 16). Thus, the neurons of the lateral region are not grouped into nuclei, but are scattered among the fibers of the medial forebrain bundle, which runs through the lateral hypothalamus. These cells control behavioral arousal and shifts of attention, especially as related to reproductive activities.In summary, the hypothalamus regulates an enormous range of physiological and behavioral activities and serves as the key controlling center for visceral motor activity and for homeostatic functions generally.reflexes that control the bladder, reflexes related to sexual function, and other critical autonomic reflexes underlying respiration and vomiting (see Box A in Chapter 16).In addition to these important connections to the reticular formation, hypothalamic control of visceral motor function is also exerted more directly by projections to the cranial nerve nuclei that contain parasympathetic preganglionic neurons, and to the sympathetic and parasympathetic preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord. Nevertheless, the autonomic centers of the reticular formation and the preganglionic visceral motor neurons that they control are competent to function autonomously should disease or injury impede the governance of the hypothalamus over the many bodily systems that maintain homeostasis. The general organization of this central autonomic control is summarized in The neurotransmitter functions of the visceral motor system are of enormous importance in clinical practice, and drugs that act on the autonomic system are among the most important in the clinical armamentarium. Moreover, autonomic transmitters have played a major role in the history of efforts to understand synaptic function. Consequently, neurotransmission in the visceral motor system deserves special comment (see also Chapter 6).Acetylcholine is the primary neurotransmitter of both sympathetic and parasympathetic preganglionic neurons. Nicotinic receptors on autonomic ganglion cells are ligand-gated ion channels that mediate a so-called fast EPSP (much like nicotinic receptors at the neuromuscular junction). In contrast, muscarinic acetylcholine receptors on ganglion cells are members of the 7-transmembrane G-protein-linked receptor family, and they mediate slower synaptic responses (see Chapters 6 and 7).The primary action of muscarinic receptors in autonomic ganglion cells is to close K + channels, making the neurons more excitable and generating a prolonged EPSP. Acting in concert with the muscarinic activities are neuropeptides that serve as co-neurotransmitters at the ganglionic synapses. As described in Chapter 6, peptide neurotransmitters also tend to exert slowly developing and long-lasting effects on postsynaptic neurons. As a result of these two acetylcholine receptor types and a rich repertoire of neuropeptide transmitters, ganglionic synapses mediate both rapid excitation and a slower modulation of autonomic ganglion cell activity.The postganglionic effects of autonomic ganglion cells on their smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, or glandular targets are mediated by two primary neurotransmitters: norepinephrine (NE) and acetylcholine (ACh). For the most part, sympathetic ganglion cells release norepinephrine onto their targets (a notable exception is the cholinergic sympathetic innervation of sweat glands), whereas parasympathetic ganglion cells typically release acetylcholine. As expected from the foregoing account, these two neurotransmitters usually have opposing effects on their target tissue-contraction versus relaxation of smooth muscle, for example.As described in Chapters 6 and 7, the specific effects of either ACh or NE are determined by the type of receptor expressed in the target tissue, and the downstream signaling pathways to which these receptors are linked. Peripheral sympathetic targets generally have two subclasses of noradrenergic The characteristic clinical presentation of damage to the pathway that controls the sympathetic division of the visceral motor system to the head and neck is called Horner's syndrome, after the Swiss ophthalmologist who first described this clinical picture in the midnineteenth century. The main features, as illustrated in All these signs are explained by a loss of sympathetic tone due to damage somewhere along the pathway that connects visceral motor centers in the hypothalamus and reticular formation with sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the intermediolateral cell column of the thoracic spinal cord ( The effects of acetylcholine released by parasympathetic ganglion cells onto smooth muscles, cardiac muscle, and glandular cells also vary according to the subtypes of muscarinic cholinergic receptors found in the peripheral target In contrast to the relatively restricted responses generated by norepinephrine and acetylcholine released by sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglion cells, respectively, neurons of the enteric nervous system achieve an enormous diversity of target effects by virtue of many different neurotrans- Since this feedback loop entails some of the central components of the visceral motor system, in addition to endocrine mechanisms via insulin and growth hormone, it is discussed here. The peptide ghrelin is secreted by the stomach prior to feeding, presumably as a signal of hunger; adipocytes (the cells that concentrate lipid in fatty tissues) secrete leptin into the circulation following feeding, presumably as a signal for satiety. The receptors for these peptides are concentrated in small groups of neurons in the ventrolateral and anterior hypothalamus (see Box A), which contact additional hypothalamic neurons in the arcuate region. These grehlin-and leptin-responsive cells modulate the activity of neurons expressing the opiomelanocortin propeptide (POMC) and the subsequent secretion of α-melanocyte secreting hormone (α-MSH), one of the peptides encoded by the POMC transcript. This hormone evidently regulates appetite and satiety by acting on specific receptors (particularly the melanocortin receptor subtype called MCR-4) located on additional populations of hypothalamic and brainstem neurons (particularly those in the nucleus of the solitary tract), as well as by endocrine mechanisms that remain poorly understood.The interactions of leptin, grehlin, α-MSH and MCR-4 were first determined in animal models. Two recessive mutations in mice-the obese (ob/ob) and the misnamed diabetic (db/db) mice-were identified based on excessive body weight and failure to regulate food intake. When each mutation was cloned, the mutant gene in ob mice turned out to be the gene for leptin, and the db gene that for the leptin receptor. Mutations in the POMC ( Genetic analysis of individuals in human pedigrees with extreme obesity (measured body mass indices and weight/height ratios) revealed mutations in one or more of the leptin, leptin receptor, or MCR4 genes. As a result, these individuals have little sense of satiety after eating, and thus fail to regulate food intake based on signals other than gastric distension and pain. How this pathophysiology is related to less extreme degrees of obesity is not yet known, but is being intensely studied because of its implications for normal weight control.The emerging understanding of body weight regulation by hypothalamic circuits that are modulated by feedback from by hormonal signals from fat tissues has provided new ways of thinking about pharmacological therapies for weight control. While leptin mimetics have proven generally ineffective, leptin administration in human subjects with leptin deficiencies does reduce food intake and obesity ( Many examples of specific autonomic functions could be used to illustrate in more detail how the visceral motor system operates. The three outlined here-control of cardiovascular function, control of the bladder, and control of sexual function-have been chosen primarily because of their importance in human physiology and clinical practice.The cardiovascular system is subject to precise reflex regulation so that an appropriate supply of oxygenated blood can be reliably provided to different body tissues under a wide range of circumstances. The sensory monitoring for this critical homeostatic process entails primarily mechanical (barosensory) information about pressure in the arterial system and, secondarily, chemical (chemosensory) information about the levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. The parasympathetic and sympathetic activity relevant to cardiovascular control is determined by the information supplied by these sensors. The mechanoreceptors (called baroreceptors) are located in the heart and major blood vessels; the chemoreceptors are located primarily in the carotid bodies, which are small, highly specialized organs located at the bifurcation of the common carotid arteries (some chemosensory tissue is also found in the aorta). The nerve endings in baroreceptors are activated by deformation as the elastic elements of the vessel walls expand and contract. The chemoreceptors in the carotid bodies and aorta respond directly to the partial pressure of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. Both afferent systems convey their status via the vagus nerve to the nucleus of the solitary tract The afferent information derived from changes in arterial pressure and blood gas levels reflexively modulates the activity of the relevant visceral  In contrast to this sequence of events in response to raised blood pressure, a fall in blood pressure (as might occur from blood loss) has the opposite effect-it inhibits parasympathetic activity while increasing sympathetic activity. As a result, norepinephrine is released from sympathetic postganglionic terminals, increasing the rate of cardiac pacemaker activity and enhancing cardiac contractility, at the same time increasing release of catecholamines from the adrenal medulla (which further augments these and many other sympathetic effects that enhance the response to this threatening situation). Norepinephrine released from the terminals of sympathetic ganglion cells also acts on the smooth muscles of the arterioles to increase the tone of the peripheral vessels, particularly those in the skin, subcutaneous tissues, and muscles, thus shunting blood away from these tissues to those organs where oxygen and metabolites are urgently needed to maintain function (e.g., brain, heart, and kidneys in the case of blood loss). If these reflex sympathetic responses fail to raise the blood pressure sufficiently (in which case the patient is said to be in shock), the vital functions of these organs begin to fail, often catastrophically.A more mundane circumstance that requires a reflex autonomic response to a fall in blood pressure is standing up. Rising quickly from a prone position produces a shift of some 300-800 milliliters of blood from the thorax and abdomen to the legs, resulting in a sharp (approximately 40%) decrease in the output of the heart. The adjustment to this normally occurring drop in blood pressure (called orthostatic hypotension) must be rapid and effective, as evidenced by the dizziness sometimes experienced in this situation. Indeed, normal individuals can briefly lose consciousness as a result of blood pooling in the lower extremities, which is the usual cause of fainting among healthy individuals who stand still for abnormally long periods.The sympathetic innervation of the heart arises from the preganglionic neurons in the intermediolateral column of the spinal cord, extending from roughly the first through fifth thoracic segments (see The autonomic regulation of the bladder provides a good example of the interplay between components of the somatic motor system that are subject to volitional control (we obviously have voluntary control over urination), and the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the visceral motor system, which operate involuntarily.The arrangement of afferent and efferent innervation of the bladder is shown in The sympathetic innervation of the bladder originates in the lower thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord segments (T10-L2), the preganglionic axons running to sympathetic neurons in the inferior mesenteric ganglion and the ganglia of the pelvic plexus. The postganglionic fibers from these ganglia travel in the hypogastric and pelvic nerves to the bladder, where sympathetic activity causes the internal urethral sphincter to close (postganglionic sympathetic fibers also innervate the blood vessels of the bladder, and in males the smooth muscle fibers of the prostate gland). Stimulation of this pathway in response to a modest increase in bladder pressure from the accumulation of urine thus closes the internal sphincter and inhibits the contraction of the bladder wall musculature, allowing the bladder to fill. At the same time, moderate distension of the bladder inhibits parasympathetic activity (which would otherwise contract the bladder and allow the internal sphincter to open). When the bladder is full, afferent activity conveying this information centrally increases parasympathetic tone and decreases sympathetic activity, causing the internal sphincter muscle to relax and the bladder to contract. In this circumstance, the urine is held in check by the voluntary somatic motor innervation of the external urethral sphincter muscle (see The voluntary control of the external sphincter is mediated by a-motor neurons of the ventral horn in the sacral spinal cord segments (S2-S4), which cause the striated muscle fibers of the sphincter to contract. During bladder filling (and subsequently, until circumstances permit urination) these neurons are active, keeping the external sphincter closed and preventing bladder emptying. During urination (or voiding, as clinicians often call this process), this tonic activity is temporarily inhibited, leading to relaxation in the external sphincter muscle. Thus, urination results from the coordinated activity of sacral parasympathetic neurons and temporary inactivity of the a-motor neurons of the voluntary motor system.The central governance of these events stems from the reticular formation of the rostral pons, the relevant pontine circuitry being referred to as the micturition center (micturition is also "medicalese" for urination). As many as five other central regions have been implicated in the coordination of urinary functions, including the locus coeruleus, the anterior-medial hypothalamus, the septal nuclei, and several cortical regions. The cortical regions primarily concerned with the voluntary control of bladder function include the paracentral lobule, the cingulate gyrus, and the prefrontal cortex. This functional distribution accords with the motor representation of perineal musculature in the medial part of the primary motor cortex (see Chapter 16), and the planning functions of the frontal lobes (see Chapter 25), which are equally pertinent to bodily functions (remembering to stop by the bathroom before going on a long trip, for instance).Importantly, paraplegic patients, or patients who have otherwise lost descending control of the sacral spinal cord, continue to exhibit autonomic regulation of bladder function, since urination is eventually stimulated reflexively at the level of the sacral cord by sufficient bladder distension. Unfortunately, this reflex is not fully efficient in the absence of descending motor control, resulting in a variety of problems in paraplegics and others with diminished or absent central control of bladder function. The major difficulty is incomplete bladder emptying, which often leads to chronic urinary tract infections from the culture medium provided by retained urine, and thus the need for an indwelling catheter to ensure adequate drainage.Much like control of the bladder, sexual responses are mediated by the coordinated activity of sympathetic, parasympathetic, and somatic innervation. Although these reflexes differ in detail in males and females, basic similarities allow the two sexes to be considered together, not only in humans but in mammals generally. The relevant autonomic effects include: (1) the mediation of vascular dilation, which causes penile or clitoral erection; (2) stimulation of prostatic or vaginal secretions; (3) smooth muscle contraction of the vas deferens during ejaculation in males or rhythmic vaginal contractions during orgasm in females; and (4) contractions of the somatic pelvic muscles that accompany orgasm in both sexes.Like the urinary tract, the reproductive organs receive preganglionic parasympathetic innervation from the sacral spinal cord, preganglionic sympathetic innervation from the outflow of the lower thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord segments, and somatic motor innervation from a-motor neurons in the ventral horn of the lower spinal cord segments In contrast, sympathetic activity causes vasoconstriction and loss of erection. The lumbar sympathetic pathway to the sexual organs originates in the thoraco-lumbar segments (T1-L2) and reaches the target organs via the corresponding sympathetic chain ganglia and the inferior mesenteric and pelvic ganglia, as in the case of the autonomic bladder control.The afferent effects of genital stimulation are conveyed centrally from somatic sensory endings via the dorsal roots of S2-S4, eventually reaching the somatic sensory cortex (reflex sexual excitation may also occur by local stimulation, as is evident in paraplegics). The reflex effects of such stimulation are increased parasympathetic activity, which, as noted, causes relaxation of the smooth muscles in the wall of the sinusoids and subsequent erection.Finally, the somatic component of reflex sexual function arises from amotor neurons in the lumbar and sacral spinal cord segments. These neurons provide excitatory innervation to the bulbocavernosus and ischiocavernosus muscles, which are active during ejaculation in males and mediate the contractions of the perineal (pelvic floor) muscles that accompany orgasm in both male and females.Sexual functions are governed centrally by the anterior-medial and medial-tuberal zones of the hypothalamus, which contain a variety of nuclei pertinent to visceral motor control and reproductive behavior (see Box A).Although they remain poorly understood, these nuclei act as integrative centers for sexual responses and are also thought to be involved in more complex aspects of sexuality, such as sexual preference and gender identity (see Chapter 29). The relevant hypothalamic nuclei receive inputs from several areas of the brain, including-as one might imagine-the cortical and subcortical structures concerned with emotion, hedonic reward, and memory (see Chapters 28 and 30).  Sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia, which contain the primary visceral motor neurons that innervate smooth muscles, cardiac muscle, and glands, are controlled by preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem. The sympathetic preganglionic neurons that govern ganglion cells in the sympathetic division of the visceral motor system arise from neurons in the thoracic and upper lumbar segments of the spinal cord; parasympathetic preganglionic neurons, in contrast, are located in the brainstem and sacral spinal cord. Sympathetic ganglion cells are distributed in the sympathetic chain (paravertebral) and prevertebral ganglia, whereas the parasympathetic motor neurons are more widely distributed in ganglia that lie within or near the organs they control. Most autonomic targets receive inputs from both the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems, which act in a generally antagonistic fashion. The diversity of autonomic functions is achieved primarily by different types of receptors for the two primary classes of postganglionic autonomic neurotransmitters, norepinephrine in the case of the sympathetic division and acetylcholine in the parasympathetic division. The visceral motor system is regulated by sensory feedback provided by dorsal root and cranial nerve sensory ganglion cells that make local reflex connections in the spinal cord or brainstem and project to the nucleus of the solitary tract in the brainstem, and by descending pathways from the hypothalamus and brainstem reticular formation, the major controlling centers of the visceral motor system (and of homeostasis more generally). The importance of the visceral motor control of organs such as the heart, bladder, and reproductive organsand the many pharmacological means of modulating autonomic functionhave made visceral motor control a central theme in clinical medicine. Although we think of ourselves as the same person throughout life, the structural and functional state of the brain changes dramatically over the human lifespan. The initial development of the nervous system entails the generation and differentiation of neurons, the formation of axonal pathways, and the elaboration of vast numbers of synapses. Each of these events relies upon the interplay of secreted signals, their receptors, and transcriptional regulators, as well as adhesion and recognition molecules that determine appropriate identity, positions, and connections for developing neurons. The circuits that emerge from these processes mediate an increasingly complex array of behaviors. Subsequent experience during postnatal life-and the activity-dependent molecular mechanisms that translate experience into changes in neuronal growth and gene expression-continues to shape neural circuits, the related behavioral repertoires, and ultimately cognitive abilities. These changes are most pronounced during developmental windows in early life called critical periods. Even in maturity, however, synaptic connections can be modified as new skills and memories are acquired and older ones are forgotten; even some new neurons can be generated in a few specialized regions. Some of the mechanisms used during early development are evidently retained and adapted to mediate these ongoing changes in the mature brain.Finally, like any other organ system, the brain is subject to disease and traumatic insults. Some of these processes call repair mechanisms into play; however, the capacity of the mature brain for repair or regeneration is limited. Diseases like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease all reflect pathologies of processes that normally contribute to neuronal development and to the subsequent maintenance and modification of neural circuitry.The elaborate architecture of the adult brain is the product of genetic instructions, cell-to-cell signals, and eventually interactions between the developing child and the external world. The early development of the nervous system is dominated by events that occur prior to the formation of synapses and are therefore activity-independent. These early events include the establishment of the primordial nervous system in the embryo, the initial generation of neurons from undifferentiated precursor cells, the formation of the major brain regions, and the migration of neurons from sites of generation to their final positions. These processes set the stage for the subsequent formation of axon pathways and synaptic connections. When any of these processes goes awry-because of genetic mutation, disease, or exposure to drugs or chemicals-the consequences can be disastrous. Indeed, most congenital brain defects result from interference with the normal mechanisms of activityindependent neuronal development. With the advent of powerful new techniques, the cellular and molecular machinery underlying these extraordinarily complex events is beginning to be understood.Well before the patch of cells that will eventually become the brain and spinal cord appears, polarity (anterior versus posterior, medial versus lateral) and the primitive cell layers required for the subsequent formation of the nervous system are established in the embryo. Critical to this early framework in all vertebrate embryos is the process of gastrulation. This invagination of the developing embryo (which starts out as a single sheet of cells) produces the three primitive cell layers or germ layers: the outer layer, or ectoderm; the middle layer, or mesoderm; and the inner layer, or endoderm One key consequence of gastrulation is the formation of the notochord, a distinct cylinder of mesodermal cells that extends along the midline of the embryo from mid-anterior to posterior. The notochord forms from an aggregation of mesoderm that invaginates and extends inward from a surface indentation called the primitive pit, which subsequently elongates to form the primitive streak. As a result of these cell movements during gastrulation, the notochord comes to define the embryonic midline, and thus the major axis of symmetry for the entire body. The ectoderm that lies immediately above the notochord, called the neuroectoderm, gives rise to the entire nervous system.Figure 21.1 Neurulation in the mammalian embryo. On the left are dorsal views of the embryo at several different stages of early development; each boxed view on the right is a midline cross section through the embryo at the same stage. (A) During late gastrulation and early neurulation, the notochord forms by invagination of the mesoderm in the region of the primitive streak. The ectoderm overlying the notochord becomes defined as the neural plate. (B) As neurulation proceeds, the neural plate begins to fold at the midline (adjacent to the notochord), forming the neural groove and ultimately the neural tube. The neural plate immediately above the notochord differentiates into the floorplate, whereas the neural crest emerges at the lateral margins of the neural plate (farthest from the notochord). (C) Once the edges of the neural plate meet in the midline, the neural tube is complete. The mesoderm adjacent to the tube then thickens and subdivides into structures called somites-the precursors of the axial musculature and skeleton. (D) As development continues, the neural tube adjacent to the somites becomes the rudimentary spinal cord, and the neural crest gives rise to sensory and autonomic ganglia (the major elements of the peripheral nervous system). Finally, the anterior ends of the neural plate (anterior neural folds) grow together at the midline and continue to expand, eventually giving rise to the brain.In addition to specifying the basic topography of the embryo and determining the position of the nervous system, the notochord is required for subsequent neural differentiation (see The progenitor cells of the neural tube are known as neural precursor cells. These precursors are dividing neural stem cells At the most dorsal limit of the neural tube, a third population of cells emerges in the region where the edges of the folded neural plate join together. Because of their location, this set of precursors is called the neural crest The essential consequence of gastrulation and neurulation for the development of the nervous system is the emergence of a population of neural precursors from a subset of ectodermal cells. Through a variety of experimental manipulations, primarily involving extirpation or transplantation of differ- Four distinct migratory paths lead to differentiation of neural crest cells into specific cell types and structures. Cells that follow pathways (1) and (2) give rise to sensory and autonomic ganglia, respectively. The precursors of adrenal neurosecretory cells migrate along pathway (3) and eventually aggregate around the dorsal portion of the kidney. Cells destined to become non-neural tissues (for example, melanocytes) migrate along pathway (4). Each pathway permits the migrating cells to interact with different kinds of cellular environments, from which they receive inductive signals (see One of the most highly publicized issues in biology over the past several years has been the use of stem cells as a possible way of treating a variety of neurodegenerative conditions, including Parkinson's, Huntington's, and Alzheimer's diseases. Amidst the social, political, and ethical debate set off by the promise of stem cell therapies, an issue that tends to get lost is what, exactly, is a stem cell?Neural stem cells are an example of a broader class of stem cells called somatic stem cells. These cells are found in various tissues, either during development or in the adult. All somatic stem cells share two fundamental characteristics: they are self-renewing, and upon terminal division and differentiation they can give rise to the full range of cell classes within the relevant tissue.Thus, a neural stem cell can give rise to another neural stem cell or to any of the main cell classes found in the central and peripheral nervous system (inhibitory and excitatory neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes; Neural stem cells, and indeed all classes of somatic stem cells, are distinct from embryonic stem cells. Embryonic stem cells (also known as ES cells) are derived from pre-gastrula embryos. ES cells also have the potential for infinite self-renewal and can give rise to all tissue and cell types throughout the organism including germ cells that can generate gametes (recall that somatic stem cells can only generate tissue specific cell types). There is some debate about the capacity of somatic stem cells to assume embryonic stem cell properties. Some experiments with hematopoetic and neural stem cells indicate that these cells can give rise to appropriately differentiated cells in other tissues; however, some of these experiments have not been replicated.The ultimate therapeutic promise of stem cells-neural or other types-is their ability to generate newly differentiated cell classes to replace those that may have been lost due to disease or injury. Such therapies have been imagined for some forms of diabetes (replacement of islet cells that secrete insulin) and some hematopoetic diseases. In the nervous system, stem cell therapies have been suggested for replacement of dopaminergic cells lost to Parkinson's disease and replacing lost neurons in other degenerative disorders.While intriguing, this projected use of stem cell technology raises some significant perils. These include insuring the controlled division of stem cells when introduced into mature tissue, and identifying the appropriate molecular instructions to achieve differentiation of the desired cell class. Clearly, the latter challenge will need to be met with a fuller understanding of the signaling and transcriptional regulatory steps used during development to guide differentiation of relevant neuron classes in the embryo.At present, there is no clinically validated use of stem cells for human therapeutic applications in the nervous system. Nevertheless, some promising work in mice and other experimental animals indicates that both somatic and ES cells can acquire distinct identities if given appropriate instructions in vitro (i.e., prior to introduction into the host), and if delivered into a supportive host environment. For example, ES cells grown in the presence of platelet-derived growth factor, which biases progenitors toward glial fates, can generate oligodendroglial cells that can myelinate axons in myelindeficient rats. Similarly, ES cells pretreated with retinoic acid matured into motor neurons when introduced into the ent portions of developing embryos, embryologists recognized early on that this process depends on signals arising from cells in the primitive pit and notochord. Because a wide variety of chemical agents and physical manipulations are able to mimic some of the effects of these endogenous signals, their nature remained a mystery for several decades. It is now clear that the generation of cell identity-of which neural induction is but one mechanism-results from the spatial and temporal control of different sets of genes by endogenous signaling molecules One of the first of these inductive signals to be identified was retinoic acid, a derivative of vitamin A and a member of the steroid/thyroid superfamily of hormones The receptors for inductive signals, their locations, and their mode of action are clearly essential elements in determing the consequences of inductive signaling sized by embryonic tissues. Subsequent studies have shown that retinoic acid activates gene expression at several sites in the embryo including the developing brain (see The role of retinoic acid as both a teratogen and an endogenous signaling molecule implies that the retinoids cause birth defects by mimicking the normal signals that influence gene expression.The story provides a good example of how teratogenic, clinical, cellular, and molecular observations can be combined to explain seemingly bizarre developmental pathology. Some inductive signals use more indirect signaling routes. For example, the transduction of signals via sonic hedgehog depends on the cooperative binding of two surface receptors followed by internalization of the receptor. The internalized complexes influence nuclear translocation of transcription factors (including Gli1) and subsequent modulation of gene expression. The transduction of Wnt signals has a similarly circuitous route, leading ultimately to the nucleus. Wnt receptors, including a family of proteins with the fanciful name "frizzled," initiate a cascade of events after Wnt binding that leads to the degradation of a cytoplasmic protein complex that normally prevents the translocation of β-catenin from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Once freed from this inhibition, β-catenin enters the nucleus and influences expression of a number of downstream genes.A particularly distinctive aspect neural induction is the mechanism by which the BMPs influence neural differentiation (see Soon after neural tube formation, the forerunners of the major brain regions become apparent as a result of morphogenetic movements that bend, fold, and constrict the neural tube. Initially, the anterior end of the tube forms a crook, giving it the shape of a cane handle Once the primitive brain regions are established in this way, they undergo at least two more rounds of partitioning, each of which produces additional regions in the adult The notion that particular genes can influence the establishment of distinct regions in an embryo arose from efforts to catalog single-gene mutations that affect development of the fruit fly Drosophila. In the 1960s and 1970s, E. B. Lewis at the California Institute of Technology reported a number of mutations that resulted in either the duplication of a distinct body segment or the appearance of an inappropriate structure at an ectopic location in the fly. These genes were called homeotic genes because they were able to convert segments of one sort to those of another (homeo is Greek for "similar"). Subsequently, studies by C. Nusslein-Volhard and E. Wieschaus demonstrated the existence of numerous such "master control" genes, each forming part of a cascade of gene expression leading to the distinctive segmentation of the developing embryo. (In 1995, Lewis, Nusslein-Volhard, and Wieschaus shared a Nobel Prize for these discoveries.)Homeotic genes code for DNA-binding proteins-that is, transcription factors-that bind to a particular sequence of genomic DNA called the "homeobox." Similar genes have been found in most species, including humans. Using an approach known as cloning by homology, at least four "clusters" of homeobox genes have been identified in virtually all vertebrates that have been examined. The genes of each cluster are closely, but not consecutively, spaced on a single chromosome. Other motifs identified in Drosophila have led to the discovery of additional families of DNA-binding proteins, which have again been found in a variety of species.Importantly, a number of developmental anomalies in mice and humans have been associated with mutations in the homeotic or other developmental control genes initially identified in the fly. Relatively rare diseases like aniridia, Waardenburg syndrome, and Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (all disorders that disrupt the nervous system and peripheral structures like the iris or the digits) have been associated with human genes that are homologues of Drosophila developmental control genes. In addition, several other developmental disorders including autism and various forms of mental retardation can be associated with mutations or polymorphisms of homeobox genes (see text). Thus, the initial insights into the molecular control of development gleaned from genetic studies of Drosophila have opened new avenues for exploring the molecular basis of developmental disorders in humans.that the process of segmentation-used by all animal embryos at the earliest stages of development to establish regional identity in the body-might also establish regional identity in the developing brain. Enthusiasm for this hypothesis was stimulated by observations of the development of the body plan of the fruit fly Drosophila. In the fly, early expression of a class of genes called homeotic or homeobox genes (Box C) guides the differentiation of the embryo into distinct segments that give rise to the head, thorax, and abdomen The recent explosion of information about molecules that influence brain development provides a basis for reevaluating the causes of a number of congenital brain malformations, as well as various forms of mental retardation. For instance, some forms of hydrocephalus (caused by impeded flow of cerebrospinal fluid, which increases pressure and results in enlarged ventricles and eventually cortical atrophy as a result of compression) can be traced to mutations of genes on the X chromosome, especially those in the L1 cell adhesion molecule (see Chapter 22). Similarly, fragile-X syndrome, the most common form of congenital mental retardation, is associated with triplet repeats in a subset of genes on the X chromosome, particularly the fragile-X protein, which is involved in stabilizing dendritic processes and synapses.Beyond these X-linked abnormalities, there are at least two genetic disorders that compromise the nervous system generated by single gene mutations in homeobox-like transcription factors. Aniridia (characterized by loss Early Brain Development 515 tion of cranial nerves in the developing brain. Mutation or ectopic activation of Hox genes in mice alters the position of specific cranial nerves, or prevents their formation. Mutation of the HoxA-1 gene by homologous recombination-the socalled "knockout" strategy for targeting mutations to specific genes-prevents normal formation of rhombomeres. In these animals, development of the external, middle, and inner ear is also compromised, and cranial nerve ganglia are fused and located incorrectly. Conversely, when the HoxA-1 gene is expressed in a rhombomere where it is usually not seen, the ectopic expression causes changes in rhombomere identity and subsequent differentiation. It is likely that problems in rhombomere formation are the underlying cause of congenital nervous system defects involving cranial nerves, ganglia, and peripheral structures derived from the cranial neural crest (the part of the neural crest that arises from the hindbrain).The exact relationship between early patterns of rhombomere-specific gene transcription and subsequent cranial nerve development remains a puzzle. Nevertheless, the correspondence between these repeating units in the embryonic brain and similar iterated units in the development of the insect body (see of the iris in the eye and mild mental retardation) and Waardenburg syndrome (characterized by craniofacial abnormalities, spina bifida, and hearing loss) are caused by mutations in the Pax6 and Pax3 genes, respectively, both of which produce transcription factors (see Box C). Finally, developmental disorders such as autism and other severe social or learning impairments have been linked in some cases to mutations in specific genes (including some of the Wnt family), as well as to microdeletions or duplications of specific chromosomal regions. Perhaps the best known example of this class of neurodevelopmental disorders is Down syndrome or trisomy 21, which is caused by the duplication of part or all of chromosome 21, usually due to failure of meiosis during the final stages of oogenesis. This duplication leads to three copies of the genes on chromosome 21; an as yet unknown subset of these genes leads to increased levels of the relevant proteins and altered neural development.Although the connections between these aberrant genes and the resulting anomalies of brain development are not yet understood, such correlations provide a starting point for exploring the molecular pathogenesis of many congenital disorders of the nervous system.Once the neural tube has developed into a rudimentary brain and spinal cord, the generation and differentiation of the permanent cellular elements of the brain-neurons and glia-begins in earnest. As noted in Chapter 1, the mature human brain contains about 100 billion neurons and many more glial cells, all generated over the course of only a few months from a small population of precursor cells. Except for a few specialized cases (see Chapter 24), the entire neuronal complement of the adult brain is produced during a time window that closes before birth; thereafter, precursor cells disappear, and few if any new neurons can be added to replace those lost by age or injury in most brain regions. The precursor cells are located in the ventricular zone, the innermost cell layer surrounding the lumen of the neural tube, and a region of extraordinary mitotic activity. It has been estimated that in humans, about 250,000 new neurons are generated each minute during the peak of cell proliferation during gestation.The dividing precursor cells in the ventricular zone undergo a stereotyped pattern of cell movements as they progress through the mitotic cycle, leading to the formation of either new stem cells or postmitotic neuroblasts that differentiate into neurons In animals with extraordinarily simple nervous systems, such as the worm Caenorhabditis elegans, it is possible to directly monitor in a microscope each embryonic stem cell as it undergoes its characteristic series of cell divisions, and to thereby determine when a specific neuron is born. In the vastly more complex vertebrate brain, however, this approach is not feasible. Instead, neurobiologists rely on the characteristics of the cell cycle itself to label cells according to their date of birth. When cells are actively replicating DNA, they take up nucleotides-the building blocks of DNA (see One of the earliest insights obtained from this approach was that the layers of the cerebral cortex develop in an "insideout" fashion (see neurons are arranged into layered structures (hippocampus, cerebellum, superior colliculus) there is a systematic relationship between the layers and the time of cell origin. Thus, each layer consists of a cohort of cells generated during a specific developmental period. The implication of this phenomenon is that common periods of neurogenesis are important for the development of the cell types and connections that characterize each layer.The neuronal precursor cells in the ventricular zone of the embryonic brain look and act more or less the same. Yet these precursors ultimately give rise to postmitotic cells that are enormously diverse in form and function. The spinal cord, cerebellum, cerebral cortex, and subcortical nuclei (including the basal ganglia and thalamus) each contain several neuronal cell types distinguished by morphology, neurotransmitter content, cell surface molecules, and the types of synapses they make and receive. On an even more basic level, the stem cells of the ventricular zone produce both neurons and gliacells with markedly different properties and functions. How and when are these different cell types determined?The bulk of the evidence favors the view that neuronal differentiation is based primarily on local cell-cell interactions followed by distinct histories of transcriptional regulation via a "code" of transcription factors expressed in each cell The use of genetic approaches, particularly in simple, so-called "model" organisms such as fruit flies and the worm Caenorhabditis elegans, has made clear the essential role of local cell-cell interactions, and has indicated some of the molecules that mediate these processes in neural fate determination. In the fruit fly eye, the position and identity of a variety of photoreceptor cells with distinct visual functions relies upon signaling mediated by cell surface ligands on one class of cells and specific receptor kinases on adjacent cells Similar local interactions have been invoked to explain differentiation of a number of neuronal and glial classes in the developing vertebrate brain. Perhaps not surprisingly, many of the signaling molecules that are essential for initial steps of neural induction and regionalization-retinoic acid, the FGFs, BMPs, shh, and Wnts-all influence the genesis of specific classes of neurons and glia via local cell-cell interactions (see These molecular details provide an outline of how general cell classes are established; however, there is presently no clear and complete explanation for how any specific neuronal class achieves its identity. This gap in knowledge presents a problem in using neural stem cells to generate replacements for specific cell classes lost in neurodegenerative diseases or after brain injury (see Box A). The cellular positioning that constrains local signaling depends on migration of postmitotic neuroblasts in the fetal brain. Migration is a ubiquitous feature of development that brings cells into appropriate spatial relationships. In the nervous system, migration during development brings different classes of neurons together so that they can interact appropriately. The final location of a postmitotic nerve cell is presumably especially critical, since neural function depends on precise connections made by neurons and their targets. In short, the developing presynaptic and postsynaptic elements must be in the right place at the right time.After their final mitosis in the ventricular zone, most neuroblasts migrate substantial distances. For neurons of the central nervous system, this migration remains within the limits of the neural tube. However, neurons of the peripheral nervous system, which come from the neural crest, arise from cells that have often journeyed a considerable distance through several embryonic environments (see A good deal is now known about the mechanics of how neurons move from their birthplace to their final destina- Figure 21.9 Essential molecular and cellular mechanisms that guide neuronal and glial differentiation in the neural ectoderm. (1-3) The steps by which ectoderm acquires its identity as neural ectoderm. Generation of neural precursors, or stem cells, relies first on the balance of BMP and its endogenous antagonists like noggin and chordin in the developing embryo. Next, local sources of inductive signals, including TFG-β family members and sonic hedgehog, establish gradients that influence subsequent neural precursor identities, as well as identifying local "organizers" (such as the floorplate and roofplate) that define the cellular identity of the inductive signaling centers. (4-7) Steps thought to define neurons, oligodendroglia, and astrocytes from multipotent neuronal precursors. Balanced signaling activity of notch and transcriptional control of the bHLH proneural genes (named based on their ability to bias neural progenitor cells toward a differentiate neural fate) influence neurogenesis. Similarly, antagonistic transcriptional regulation via either the bHLH genes or three additional transcription factors, Olig1, Olig2, and Nkx2.2, influence the generation of oligodendroglia. Continued antagonism between bHLH genes, notch signaling, and the signal molecule neureglin (Nrg) is thought to influence the generation of mature astrocytes. Finally, in the adult brain, cells adjacent to the ventricles (which apparently have avoided becoming differentiated) remain as ependymal cells. These may included a subpopulation of neural stem cells (see Box A). Histological observations of embryonic brains made by Wilhelm His and Ramon y Cajál during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries suggested that neuroblasts crawled along glial guides to their final locations Thus, neuronal migration involves much more than the mechanics of moving cells from one place to another. As in the case of inductive events during the initial formation of the nervous system, stereotyped movements bring different classes of cells into contact with one another, thereby providing a means of constraining cell-cell signaling to specific times and places. For many years, developmental neurobiologists assumed that position was destiny in the developing brain. For example, if a neuron was found in the thalamus, cerebellum, or cerebral cortex in the adult brain, it most likely came from a neural progenitor cell in the embryonic brain region that gave rise to the thalamus, cerebellum, or cerebral cortex. The identification of rhombomeres and subsequent evidence that these domains are compartments between which little mixing of cells occurs reinforced this notion. Nevertheless, a few observations hinted that all neurogenesis might not be local, and eventually led to a new idea of how neuronal classes in a variety of brain regions are integrated into mature structures and circuits. The initial indication of this tendency for subsets of neurons to wander came in the late 1960s with a report that neurons in the pulvinar, a thalamic nucleus assumed to be derived from the diencephalon, were actually generated in the telencephalon. This observation received little notice until the mid 1980s, when a series of experiments using chick-quail chimeras suggested that a major portion of granule cells in the cerebellum (small local circuit neurons) were actually generated outside the rhombencephalon (the embryonic region associated with the generation of the cerebellum). Most of these extrinsic cells were thought to migrate from the mesencephalon (associated with the generation of the superior and inferior colliculus in the adult brain) into the external granule cell layer of the cerebellum. Together, these findings implied that adult brain structures might be derived from a broad range of embryonic brain subdivisions.Around the same time, several investigators noticed a small but consistent proportion of cells in the cerebral cortex whose migratory route was apparently tangential rather than radial (via radial glial guides). These observations were the focus of a lively debate that nevertheless failed to explain the significance of the apparent "escapees" from the radial migration framework in the developing cortex. Moreover, lineage analysis suggested that cortical projection neurons, interneurons, astrocytes and oligodendroglia were probably not derived from the same precursor pools. There was little consensus about these disparate observations until the mid 1990s when several groups realized that there was a massive migration of cells from the ventral forebrain-the region of the ganglionic eminence that gives rise to the caudate, putamen, and globus pallidusto the cerebral cortex ( A mosaic of transcriptional regulators whose expression and activity is restricted to various domains in the ventral forebrain orchestrates this long distance migration of distinct cell types ( In the human brain, for example, some GABAergic interneurons are generated locally in the cortical rudiment, in addition to those that migrate from the ventral forebrain. These locally generated interneurons apparently use the same radial glial migratory route as their glutamatergic neighbors.The developmental and functional significance of this mixing of offspring from progenitors in various embryonic brain regions remains unknown. Perhaps the range and number of cell-cell interactions necessary to generate functionally distinct cell types is so large that the appropriate population can only be determined by exposing subsets of cells to a variety of environments, and then having those cells act as messengers to deliver additional molecular signals at a new location. Regardless of the purpose of this arduous journey, its consequence is the orderly establishment of cellular diversity in a number of brain regions.The initial development of the nervous system depends on an intricate interplay of cellular movements and inductive signals. In addition to an early establishment of regional identity and cellular position as a result of morphogenesis, substantial migration of neuronal precursors is necessary for the subsequent differentiation of distinct classes of neurons, as well as for the eventual formation of specialized patterns of synaptic connections (see Chapter 22). The fate of individual precursor cells is not determined simply by their mitotic history; rather, the information required for differentiation arises largely from interactions between the developing cells and the subsequent activity of distinct transcriptional regulators. All of these events are dependent on the same categories of molecular and cellular phenomena: cell-cell signaling, changes in motility and adhesion, transcriptional regulation, and, ultimately, cell-specific changes in gene expression. The molecules that participate in signaling during early brain development are the same as the signals used by mature cells: hormones, transcription factors, other second messengers (see Chapter 7), as well as cell adhesion molecules. As might be expected, the identification and characterization of these molecules in the developing brain has begun to explain a variety of congenital neurological defects. Signaling and regulation of gene expression during early neural development are especially vulnerable to the effects of genetic mutations, and to the actions of the many drugs and toxins that can compromise the elaboration of a normal nervous system. Two central features of neural circuits must be established after neurons are generated and have migrated to their final positions. First, nerve cells in different regions must be linked together via axon pathways. Second, orderly synaptic connections must be made among appropriate pre-and postsynaptic partners. The cellular mechanisms that generate axon outgrowth and synapse formation are thus the major determinants of neural circuits that will eventually control behavior. The directed growth of axons and the recognition of synaptic targets is mediated by a specialization at the tip of each growing axon called the growth cone. Growth cones detect and respond to signaling molecules that identify correct pathways, prohibit incorrect trajectories, and ultimately facilitate functional synaptic partnerships. These include cell surface adhesion molecules and diffusible signals that either attract or repel growing axons. In addition, secreted growth factors influence axon growth and synapse formation as well as regulating appropriate numbers of connections between axons and their targets. As in other instances of intercellular communication, a variety of receptors and second messenger molecules transduce the signals provided to the growth cone. Thus cell-cell signals initiate intracellular events that underlie directed growth of the axon, the conversion of the growth cone into a presynaptic specialization, and the elaboration of a distinct postsynaptic site. The end results of the dynamic processes are a wealth of well-defined peripheral and central axon pathways and complex neural circuits that allow animals to behave in ever more sophisticated ways as they mature.Among the many extraordinary features of nervous system development, one of the most fascinating is the ability of growing axons to navigate over millimeters or even centimeters, through complex embryonic terrain, to find appropriate synaptic partners. In 1910, Ross G. Harrison, who first observed axons extending in a living tadpole in vitro, noted that "The growing fibers are clearly endowed with considerable energy and have the power to make their way through the solid or semi-solid protoplasm of the cells of the neural tube. But we are at present in the dark with regard to the conditions which guide them to specific points." Harrison's observations indicate the central features of axonal growth. First, the energy and power of growing axons reflect the cellular properties of the growth cone, a specialized structure at the tip of the extending axon. Growth cones are highly motile structures that explore the extracellular envi-ronment, determine the direction of growth, and then guide the extension of the axon in that direction. The primary morphological characteristic of a growth cone is a sheetlike expansion of the growing axon at its tip called a lamellapodium. When examined in vitro, numerous fine processes called filopodia rapidly form and disappear from the terminal expansion, like fingers reaching out to sense the environment Santiago Ramón y Cajal, Harrison's contemporary, noted further that when growth cones move along an established pathway pioneered by other axons, they tend to be simple in shape (see The complex behavior of growth cones during axonal extension suggests the presence of specific cues that cause the growth cone to move in a particular direction. In addition, the growth cone itself must have a specialized array of receptors and transduction mechanisms to respond to these cues. The cues themselves-the "condition(s) which guide … growth cones" referred to by Harrison-remained elusive for more than half a century after his initial observations of axon growth. The identity of some of the relevant molecules has been established over the last 30 years. These signals comprise a large group of molecules associated with cell adhesion and cell-cell recognition throughout the organism, as well as with directed axon or growth cone motility in the developing nervous system. The association of specific cell The functional requirement that a subset of axons from retinal ganglion cells in each eye to cross while the remainder projects to the ipsilateral side of the brain was predicted based on optical principles-most notably by Issac Newtonand confirmed (much later) by neuroanatomists and neurophysiologists (see Chapter 11). The partial crossing, or decussation, of retinal axons is most striking in primates including humans, where approximately half of the axons cross and the other half do not. All other mammals have crossed and uncrossed retinal projections; however, the percentage of uncrossed axons diminishes from 20-30% in carnivores to less than 5% in most rodents. The frequency of uncrossed axons decreases even more in other vertebrates; thus in amphibians, fish, and birds most or all of the retinal projection is crossed. For both functional and evolutionary reasons, the partial decussation of the retinal pathways and its variable extent in different species has engaged the imagination of biologists and others interested in vision. For developmental neurobiologists this phenomenon raises an obvious question: How do retinal ganglion cells choose sides so that some project contralaterally and others ipsilaterally? This question is central to understanding how the peripheral visual projection is organized to construct two accurate visual hemifield maps that superimpose points of space seen jointly by the two eyes (see Chapter 11). It also speaks to the more general issue in neural development of how axons distinguish ipsilateral and contralateral targets.It is clear that the laterality of retinal axons is determined by initial cell identity and axon guidance mechanisms rather than by regressive processes that subsequently select or sculpt these projections. Thus, the distinction between the nasal and temporal retinal regions that project ipsilaterally and contralaterally is already apparent in the retina as well as in axon trajectories at the midline and in the developing optic tract, long before the axons reach their targets. In the retina, this specificity is seen as a "line of decussation," or border, between ipsilaterally and contralaterally projecting retinal ganglion cells, detected experimentally by injecting a retrograde tracer into the nascent optic tract of very young embryos. In the retinas of such embryos there is a distinct boundary between the population of retinal ganglion cells projecting ipsilaterally in one eye (found in the temporal retina), and a complementary boundary for contralaterally projecting cells in the other eye (see Cell biological analysis of growth cone morphologies showed that the chiasm is indeed a region where growth cones explore the molecular environment in a particularly detailed way, presumably to make choices pertinent to directed growth. Furthermore, molecular analysis showed that specialized neuroepithelial cells in and around the chiasm express a number of cell adhesion molecules associated with axon guidance. Interestingly, some of these molecules-particularly netrins, slits, and their robo receptors-do not influence decussation in the chiasm as they do at other regions of the nervous system. Instead, they are expressed in cells where the chiasm forms, apparently constraining its location on the ventral surface of the diencephalon. The establishment of ipsilateral versus contralateral identity is evidently more dependent on the zinc finger transcription factor Zic2, as well as cell adhesion molecules of the ephrin family. Zic2, which is expressed specifically in the temporal retina, is associated with the expression of a distinct Eph receptor, EphB1, in the axons arising from temporal retinal ganglion cells. The ephrin B2 ligand, which is recognized as a repellent of EphB1 axons, is found in midline glial cells in the optic chiasm. In support of the functional importance of these molecules, disrupting Zic2, EphB1 or ephrin B2 function diminishes the degree of ipsilateral projection in developing mice; in accord with this finding, neither Zic2 nor ephrin B2 is expressed in vertebrate species that lack ipsilateral projections.These observations thus provide a molecular framework for the identification of retinal ganglion cells and the sorting of their projections at the optic chiasm. How this sorting is related to the topopgraphy of tectal, thalamic, and cortical representations is not yet known. Most observations suggest that retinal topography is not faithfully preserved among axons in the optic tracts. The identity and position of axons from nasal and temporal retinas whose retinal ganglion cells "see" a common point in the binocular hemifield must therefore be restored in the thalamus, and subsequently retained or re-established in the thalamic projections to cortex. Choosing sides at the chiasm is only a first step in establishing maps of visual space.