becomes spheroidal), and the tension exerted by the zonule fibers, which tends to flatten it. When viewing distant objects, the force from the zonule fibers is greater than the elasticity of the lens, and the lens assumes the flatter shape appropriate for distance viewing. Focusing on closer objects requires relaxing the tension in the zonule fibers, allowing the inherent elasticity of the lens to increase its curvature. This relaxation is accomplished by the sphincter-like contraction of the ciliary muscle. Because the ciliary muscle forms a ring around the lens, when the muscle contracts, the attachment points of the zonule fibers move toward the central axis of the eye, thusOptical discrepancies among the various components of the eye cause a majority of the human population to have some form of refractive error, called ametropia. People who are unable to bring distant objects into clear focus are said to be nearsighted, or myopic Myopia, or nearsightedness, is by far the most common ametropia; an estimated 50% of the population in the United States is affected. Given the large number of people who need glasses, contact lenses, or surgery to correct this refractive error, one naturally wonders how nearsighted people coped before spectacles were invented only a few centuries ago. From what is now known about myopia, most people's vision may have been considerably better in ancient times. The basis for this assertion is the surprising finding that the growth of the eyeball is strongly influenced by focused light falling on the retina. This phenomenon was first described in 1977 by Torsten Wiesel and Elio Raviola at Harvard Medical School, who studied monkeys reared with their lids sutured (the same approach used to demonstrate the effects of visual deprivation on cortical connections in the visual system; see Chapter 23), a procedure that deprives the eye of focused retinal images. They found that animals growing to maturity under these conditions show an elongation of the eyeball. The effect of focused light deprivation appears to be a local one, since the abnormal growth of the eye occurs in experimental animals even if the optic nerve is cut. Indeed, if only a portion of the retinal surface is deprived of focused light, then only that region of the eyeball grows abnormally.Although the mechanism of lightmediated control of eye growth is not fully understood, many experts now believe that the prevalence of myopia is due to some aspect of modern civilization-perhaps learning to read and write at an early age-that interferes with the normal feedback control of vision on eye development, leading to abnormal elongation of the eyeball. A corollary of this hypothesis is that if children (or, more likely, their parents) wanted to improve their vision, they might be able to do so by practicing far vision to counterbalance the near work "overload." Practically, of reducing the tension on the lens. Unfortunately, changes in the shape of the lens are not always able to produce a focused image on the retina, in which case a sharp image can be focused only with the help of additional corrective lenses (see Adjustments in the size of the pupil also contribute to the clarity of images formed on the retina. Like the images formed by other optical instruments, those generated by the eye are affected by spherical and chromatic aberrations, which tend to blur the retinal image. Since these aberrations are greatest for light rays that pass farthest from the center of the lens, narrowVision: The Eye 233 course, most people would probably choose wearing glasses or contacts or having corneal surgery rather than indulging in the onerous daily practice that would presumably be required. Not everyone agrees, however, that such a remedy would be effective, and a number of investigators (and drug companies) are exploring the possibility of pharmacological intervention during the period of childhood when abnormal eye growth is presumed to occur. In any event, it is a remarkable fact that deprivation of focused light on the retina causes a compensatory growth of the eye and that this feedback loop is so easily perturbed.Even people with normal (emmetropic) vision as young adults eventually experience difficulty focusing on near objects. One of the many consequences of aging is that the lens loses its elasticity; as a result, the maximum curvature the lens can achieve when the ciliary muscle contracts is gradually reduced. The near point (the closest point that can be brought into clear focus) thus recedes, and objects (such as this book) must be farther and farther away from the eye in order to focus them on the retina. At some point, usually during early middle age, the accommodative ability of the eye is so reduced that near vision tasks like reading become difficult or impossible ( Despite its peripheral location, the retina or neural portion of the eye, is actually part of the central nervous system. During development, the retina forms as an outpocketing of the diencephalon, called the optic vesicle, which undergoes invagination to form the optic cup There are two types of photoreceptors in the retina: rods and cones. Both types have an outer segment composed of membranous disks that contain light-sensitive photopigment and lies adjacent to the pigment epithelium, and an inner segment that contains the cell nucleus and gives rise to synaptic terminals that contact bipolar or horizontal cells (see also nerve and carry information about retinal stimulation to the rest of the central nervous system. The two other types of neurons in the retina, horizontal cells and amacrine cells, have their cell bodies in the inner nuclear layer and have processes that are limited to the outer and inner plexiform layers respectively (see At first glance, the spatial arrangement of retinal layers seems counterintuitive, since light rays must pass through various non-light-sensitive elements of the retina as well as the retinal vasculature (which branches extensively on the inner surface of the retina-see In most sensory systems, activation of a receptor by the appropriate stimulus causes the cell membrane to depolarize, ultimately stimulating an action potential and transmitter release onto the neurons it contacts. In the retina, however, photoreceptors do not exhibit action potentials; rather, light activation causes a graded change in membrane potential and a corresponding change in the rate of transmitter release onto postsynaptic neurons. Indeed, much of the processing within the retina is mediated by graded potentials, largely because action potentials are not required to transmit information over the relatively short distances involved.Perhaps even more surprising is that shining light on a photoreceptor, either a rod or a cone, leads to membrane hyperpolarization rather than depolarization ( The relatively depolarized state of photoreceptors in the dark depends on the presence of ion channels in the outer segment membrane that permit Na + and Ca 2+ ions to flow into the cell, thus reducing the degree of inside negativity The series of biochemical changes that ultimately leads to a reduction in cGMP levels begins when a photon is absorbed by the photopigment in the receptor disks. The photopigment contains a light-absorbing chromophore (retinal, an aldehyde of vitamin A) coupled to one of several possible proteins called opsins that tune the molecule's absorption of light to a particular region of the spectrum. Indeed, it is the different protein component of .5 An intracellular recording from a single cone stimulated with different amounts of light (the cone has been taken from the turtle retina, which accounts for the relatively long time course of the response). Each trace represents the response to a brief flash that was varied in intensity. At the highest light levels, the response amplitude saturates (at about -65 mV). The hyperpolarizing response is characteristic of vertebrate photoreceptors; interestingly, some invertebrate photoreceptors depolarize in response to light. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) refers to a heterogeneous group of hereditary eye disorders characterized by progressive vision loss due to a gradual degeneration of photoreceptors. An estimated 100,000 people in the United States have RP. In spite of the name, inflammation is not a prominent part of the disease process; instead the photoreceptor cells appear to die by apoptosis (determined by the presence of DNA fragmentation).Classification of this group of disorders under one rubric is based on the clinical features commonly observed in these patients. The hallmarks of RP are night blindness, a reduction of peripheral vision, narrowing of the retinal vessels, and the migration of pigment from disrupted retinal pigment epithelium into the retina, forming clumps of various sizes, often next to retinal blood vessels (see Typically, patients first notice difficulty seeing at night due to the loss of rod photoreceptors; the remaining cone photoreceptors then become the mainstay of visual function. Over many years, the cones also degenerate, leading to a progressive loss of vision. In most RP patients, visual field defects begin in the midperiphery, between 30°and 50°from the point of foveal fixation. The defective regions gradually enlarge, leaving islands of vision in the periphery and a constricted central field-a condition known as tunnel vision. When the visual field contracts to 20°or less and/or central vision is 20/200 or worse, the patient is categorized as legally blind.Inheritance patterns indicate that RP can be transmitted in an X-linked (XLRP), autosomal dominant (ADRP), or recessive (ARRP) manner. In the United States, the percentage of these genetic types is estimated to be 9%, 16%, and 41%, respectively. When only one member of a pedigree has RP, the case is classified as "simplex," which accounts for about a third of all cases.Among the three genetic types of RP, ADRP is the mildest. These patients often retain good central vision until 60 years of age or older. In contrast, patients with the XLRP form of the disease are usually legally blind by 30 to 40 years of age. However, the severity and age of onset of the symptoms varies greatly among patients with the same type of RP, and even within the same family (when, presumably, all the affected members have the same genetic mutation).To date, RP-inducing mutations of 30 genes have been identified. Many of these genes encode photoreceptor-specific proteins, several being associated with phototransduction in the rods. Among the latter are genes for rhodopsin, subunits of the cGMP phosphodiesterase, and the cGMP-gated channel. Multiple mutations have been found in each of these cloned genes. For example, in the case of the rhodopsin gene, 90 different mutations have been identified among ADRP patients.The heterogeneity of RP at all levels, from genetic mutations to clinical symptoms, has important implications for understanding the pathogenesis of the disease and designing therapies. Given the complex molecular etiology of RP, it is unlikely that a single cellular mechanism will explain the disease in all cases. Regardless of the specific mutation or causal sequence, the vision loss that is most critical to RP patients is due to the gradual degeneration of cones. In many cases, the protein that the RP-causing mutation affects is not even expressed in the cones; the prime example is rhodopsin-the rod-specific visual pigment. Therefore, the loss of cones may be an indirect result of a rod-specific mutation. In consequence, understanding and treating this disease presents a particularly difficult challenge. cGMP. All of these events take place within the disk membrane. The hydrolysis by phosphodiesterase at the disk membrane lowers the concentration of cGMP throughout the outer segment, and thus reduces the number of cGMP molecules that are available for binding to the channels in the surface of the outer segment membrane, leading to channel closure.One of the important features of this complex biochemical cascade initiated by photon capture is that it provides enormous signal amplification. It has been estimated that a single light-activated rhodopsin molecule can activate 800 transducin molecules, roughly eight percent of the transducin molecules on the disk surface. Although each transducin molecule activates only one phosphodiesterase molecule, each of these is in turn capable of catalyzing the breakdown of as many as six cGMP molecules. As a result, the absorption of a single photon by a rhodopsin molecule results in the closure of approximately 200 ion channels, or about 2% of the number of channels in each rod that are open in the dark. This number of channel closures causes a net change in the membrane potential of about 1 mV.Equally important is the fact that the magnitude of this amplification varies with the prevailing levels of illumination, a phenomenon known as light adaptation. At low levels of illumination, photoreceptors are the most sensitive to light. As levels of illumination increase, sensitivity decreases, preventing the receptors from saturating and thereby greatly extending the range of light intensities over which they operate. The concentration of Ca 2+ in the outer segment appears to play a key role in the light-induced modulation of photoreceptor sensitivity. The cGMP-gated channels in the outer segment are permeable to both Na + and Ca 2+ ; thus, light-induced closure of these channels leads to a net decrease in the internal Ca 2+ concentration. This decrease triggers a number of changes in the phototransduction cascade, all of which tend to reduce the sensitivity of the receptor to light. For example, the decrease in Ca 2+ increases the activity of quanylate cyclase, the cGMP synthesizing enzyme, leading to an increase in cGMP levels. Likewise, the decrease in Ca 2+ increases the affinity of the cGMP-gated channels for cGMP, reducing the impact of the light-induced reduction of cGMP levels. The regulatory effects of Ca 2+ on the phototransduction cascade are only one part of the mechanism that adapts retinal sensitivity to background levels of illumination; another important contribution comes from neural interactions between horizontal cells and photoreceptor terminals (see below).Once initiated, additional mechanisms limit the duration of this amplifying cascade and restore the various molecules to their inactivated states. The protein arrestin, for instance, blocks the ability of activated rhodopsin to activate transducin, and facilitates the breakdown of activated rhodopsin. The all-trans retinal then dissociates from the opsin, diffuses into the cytosol of the outer segment, is converted to all-trans retinol and is transported out of the outer segment and into the pigment epithelium, where appropriate enzymes ultimately convert it to 11-cis retinal. After it is transported back into the outer segment, the 11-cis retinal recombines with opsin in the receptor disks. The recycling of rhodopsin is critically important for maintaining the light sensitivity of photoreceptors. Even under intense levels of illumination, the rate of regeneration is sufficient to maintain a significant number of active photopigment molecules.The two types of photoreceptors, rods and cones, are distinguished by shape (from which they derive their names), the type of photopigment they contain, distribution across the retina, and pattern of synaptic connections The range of illumination over which the rods and cones operate is shown in Differences in the transduction mechanisms utilized by the two receptor types is a major factor in the ability of rods and cones to respond to different ranges of light intensity. For example, rods produce a reliable response to a single photon of light, whereas more than 100 photons are required to produce a comparable response in a cone. It is not, however, that cones fail to effectively capture photons. Rather, the change in current produced by single photon capture in cones is comparatively small and difficult to distinguish from noise. Another difference is that the response of an individual cone does not saturate at high levels of steady illumination, as does the rod response. Although both rods and cones adapt to operate over a range of luminance values, the adaptation mechanisms of the cones are more effective. This difference in adaptation is apparent in the time course of the response of rods and cones to light flashes. The response of a cone, even to a bright light flash that produces the maximum change in photoreceptor current, recovers in about 200 milliseconds, more than four times faster than rod recovery.The arrangement of the circuits that transmit rod and cone information to retinal ganglion cells also contributes to the different characteristics of scotopic and photopic vision. In most parts of the retina, rod and cone signals converge on the same ganglion cells; i.e., individual ganglion cells respond to both rod and cone inputs, depending on the level of illumination. The early stages of the pathways that link rods and cones to ganglion cells, however, are largely independent. For example, the pathway from rods to ganglion cells involves a distinct class of bipolar cell (called rod bipolar) that, unlike cone bipolar cells, does not contact retinal ganglion cells. Instead, rod bipolar cells synapse with the dendritic processes of a specific class of amacrine cell that makes gap junctions and chemical synapses with the terminals of cone bipolars; these processes, in turn, make synaptic contacts on the dendrites of ganglion cells in the inner plexiform layer. As a consequence, the circuits linking the rods and cones to retinal ganglion cells differ dramatically in their degree of convergence. Each rod bipolar cell is contacted by a number of rods, and many rod bipolar cells contact a given amacrine cell. In contrast, the cone system is much less convergent. Thus, each retinal ganglion cell that dominates central vision (called midget gan- An estimated six million people in the United States suffer from a condition known as age-related macular degeneration (AMD), which causes a progressive loss of central vision. Since central vision is critical for sight, diseases that affect the macula (see The underlying problem, which remains poorly understood, is degeneration of the photoreceptors. Usually, patients first notice a blurring of central vision when performing tasks such as reading. Images may also appear distorted. A graph paper-like chart known as the Amsler grid is used as a simple test for early signs of AMD. By focusing on a marked spot in the middle of the grid, the patient can assess whether the parallel and perpendicular lines on the grid appear blurred or distorted. Blurred central vision often progresses to having blind spots within central vision, and in most cases both eyes are eventually involved.Although the risk of developing AMD clearly increases with age, the causes of the disease are not known. Various studies have implicated hereditary factors, cardiovascular disease, environmental factors such as smoking and light exposure, and nutritional causes. Indeed, it may be that all these contribute to the risk of developing AMD.In descriptive terms, macular degeneration is broadly divided into two types. In the exudative-neovascular form, or "wet" AMD, which accounts for 10% of all cases, abnormal blood vessel growth occurs under the macula. These blood vessels leak fluid and blood into the retina and cause damage to the photoreceptors. Wet AMD tends to progress rapidly and can cause severe damage; rapid loss of central vision may occur over just a few months. The treatment for this form of the disease is laser therapy. By transferring thermal energy, the laser beam destroys the leaky blood vessels under the macula, thus slowing the rate of vision loss. A disadvantage of this approach is that the high thermal energy delivered by the beam also destroys nearby healthy tissue. An improvement in the laser treatment of AMD involves a light-activated drug to target abnormal blood vessels. Once the drug is administered, relatively low energy laser pulses aimed at the abnormal blood vessels are delivered to stimulate the drug, which in turn destroys the abnormal blood vessels with minimal damage to the surrounding tissue.The remaining 90% of AMD cases are the nonexudative, or "dry" form. In these patients there is a gradual disappearance of the retinal pigment epithelium, resulting in circumscribed areas of atrophy. Since photoreceptor loss follows the disappearance of the pigment epithelium, the affected retinal areas have little or no visual function. Vision loss from dry AMD occurs more gradually, typically over the course of many years. These patients usually retain some central vision, although the loss can be severe enough to compromise performance of tasks that require seeing details. Unfortunately, at the present time there is no treatment for dry AMD. A radical and quite fascinating new approach that offers some promise entails surgically repositioning the retina away from the abnormal area.Occasionally, macular degeneration occurs in much younger individuals. Many of these cases are caused by various mutations, each with its own clinical manifestations and genetic cause. The most common form of juvenile macular degeneration is known as Stargardt disease, which is inherited as an autosomal recessive. Patients are usually diagnosed before they reach the age of 20. Although the progression of vision loss is variable, most of these patients are legally blind by age 50. Mutations that cause Stargardt disease have been identified in the ABCR gene, which codes for a protein that transports retinoids across the photoreceptor membrane. Thus, the visual cycle of photopigment regeneration may be disrupted in this form of macular degeneration, presumably by dysfunctional proteins encoded by the abnormal gene. Interestingly, the ABCR gene is expressed only in rods, suggesting that the cones may have their own visual cycle enzymes. The distribution of rods and cones across the surface of the retina also has important consequences for vision The extremely high density of cone receptors in the fovea, and the one-toone relationship with bipolar cells and retinal ganglion cells (see earlier), endows this component of the cone system with the capacity to mediate high visual acuity. As cone density declines with eccentricity and the degree of convergence onto retinal ganglion cells increases, acuity is markedly reduced. Just 6°eccentric to the line of sight, acuity is reduced by 75%, a fact that can be readily appreciated by trying to read the words on any line of this page beyond the word being fixated on. The restriction of highest acuity vision to such a small region of the retina is the main reason humans spend so much time moving their eyes (and heads) around-in effect directing the foveas of the two eyes to objects of interest (see Chapter 19). It is also the reason why disorders that affect the functioning of the fovea have such devastating effects on sight (see Box C). Conversely, the exclusion of rods from the fovea, and their presence in high density away from the fovea, explain why the threshold for detecting a light stimulus is lower outside the region of central vision. It is easier to see a dim object (such as a faint star) by looking slightly away from it, so that the stimulus falls on the region of the retina that is richest in rods (see A special property of the cone system is color vision. Perceiving color allows humans (and many other animals) to discriminate objects on the basis of the distribution of the wavelengths of light that they reflect to the eye. While differences in luminance (i.e., overall light intensity) are often sufficient to distinguish objects, color adds another perceptual dimension that is especially useful when differences in luminance are subtle or nonexistent. Color obviously gives us a quite different way of perceiving and describing the world we live in.  (Recall that light is defined as electromagnetic radiation having wavelengths between ~400 and 700 nm.) The solid curves indicate the three kinds of cone opsins; the dashed curve shows rod rhodopsin for comparison. Absorbance is defined as the log value of the intensity of incident light divided by intensity of transmitted light.Unlike rods, which contain a single photopigment, there are three types of cones that differ in the photopigment they contain. Each of these photopigments has a different sensitivity to light of different wavelengths, and for this reason are referred to as "blue," "green," and "red" or, more appropriately, short (S), medium (M), and long (L) wavelength cones-terms that more or less describe their spectral sensitivities Much additional information about color vision has come from studies of individuals with abnormal color detecting abilities. Color vision deficiencies result either from the inherited failure to make one or more of the cone pigments or from an alteration in the absorption spectra of cone pigments (or, rarely, from lesions in the central stations that process color information; see Chapter 11). Under normal conditions, most people can match any color in a test stimulus by adjusting the intensity of three superimposed light sources generating long, medium, and short wavelengths. The fact that only three such sources are needed to match (nearly) all the perceived colors is strong Seeing color logically demands that retinal responses to different wavelengths in some way be compared. The discovery of the three human cone types and their different absorption spectra is correctly regarded, therefore, as the basis for human color vision. Nevertheless, how these human cone types and the higherorder neurons they contact (see Chapter 11) produce the sensations of color is still unclear. Indeed, this issue has been debated by some of the greatest minds in science (Hering, Helmholtz, Maxwell, Schroedinger, and Mach, to name only a few) since Thomas Young first proposed that humans must have three different receptive "particles"-i.e., the three cone types.A fundamental problem has been that, although the relative activities of three cone types can more or less explain the colors perceived in color-matching experiments performed in the laboratory, the perception of color is strongly influenced by context. For example, a patch returning the exact same spectrum of wavelengths to the eye can appear quite different depending on its surround, a phenomenon called color contrast ( Using a telemetric photometer and three adjustable illuminators generating short, middle, and long wavelength light, Land showed that two patches that in white light appeared quite different in color (e. g., green and brown) continued to look their respective colors even when the three illuminators were adjusted so that the light being returned from the "green" surfaces produced exactly the same readings on the three telephotometers as had previously come from the "brown" surface-a striking demonstration of color constancy.The phenomena of color contrast and color constancy have led to a heated modern debate about how color percepts are generated that now spans several decades. For Land, the answer lay in a series of ratiometric equations that could integrate the spectral returns of different regions over the entire scene. It was recognized even before Land's death in 1991, however, that his so-called retinex theory did not work in all circumstances and was in any event a description rather than an explanation. An alternative explanation of these contextual aspects of color vision is that color, like brightness, is generated empirically according to what spectral stimuli have typically signified in past experience (see Box E). confirmation of the fact that color sensation is based on the relative levels of activity in three sets of cones with different absorption spectra. That color vision is trichromatic was first recognized by Thomas Young at the beginning of the nineteenth century (thus, people with normal color vision are called trichromats). For about 5-6% of the male population in the United States and a much smaller percentage of the female population, however, color vision is more limited. Only two bandwidths of light are needed to match all the colors that these individuals can perceive; the third color category is simply not seen. Such dichromacy, or "color blindness" as it is commonly called, is inherited as a recessive, sex-linked characteristic and exists in two forms: protanopia, in which all color matches can be achieved by using only green and blue light, and deuteranopia, in which all matches can be achieved by using only blue and red light. In another major class of color deficiencies, all three light sources (i.e., short, medium, and long wavelengths) are needed to make all possible color matches, but the matches are made using values that are significantly different from those used by most individuals. Some of these anomalous trichromats require more red than normal to match other colors (protanomalous trichromats); others require more green than normal (deuteranomalous trichromats). Jeremy Nathans and his colleagues at Johns Hopkins University have provided a deeper understanding of these color vision deficiencies by identifying and sequencing the genes that encode the three human cone pigments Human dichromats lack one of the three cone pigments, either because the corresponding gene is missing or because it exists as a hybrid of the red and green pigment genes (see Despite the esthetically pleasing nature of color vision, most of the information in visual scenes consists of spatial variations in light intensity (a black and white movie, for example, has most of the information a color version has, although it is deficient in some respects and usually is less fun to watch). How the spatial patterns of light and dark that fall on the photoreceptors are deciphered by central targets has been a vexing problem (Box E). To understand what is accomplished by the complex neural circuits within the retina during this process, it is useful to start by considering the responses of individual retinal ganglion cells to small spots of light. Stephen Kuffler, working at Johns Hopkins University in the 1950s, pioneered this approach by characterizing the responses of single ganglion cells in the cat retina. He found that each ganglion cell responds to stimulation of a small circular patch of the retina, which defines the cell's receptive field (see Chapter 8 for discussion of receptive fields). Based on these responses, Kuffler distinguished two classes of ganglion cells, "on"-center and "off"-center Turning on a spot of light in the receptive field center of an on-center ganglion cell produces a burst of action potentials. The same stimulus applied to the receptive field center of an off-center ganglion cell reduces the rate of Understanding the link between retinal stimulation and what we see (perception) is arguably the central problem in vision, and the relation of luminance (a physical measurement of light intensity) and brightness (the sensation elicited by light intensity) is probably the simplest place to consider this challenge.As indicated in the text, how we see the brightness differences (i.e., contrast) between adjacent territories with distinct luminances depends in the first instance on the relative firing rate of retinal ganglion cells, modified by lateral interactions. However, there is a problem with the assumption that the central nervous system simply "reads out" these relative rates of ganglion cell activity to sense brightness. The difficulty, as in perceiving color, is that the brightness of a given target is markedly affected by its context in ways that are difficult or impossible to explain in terms of the retinal output as such. The accompanying figures, which illustrate two simultaneous brightness contrast illusions, help make this point. In A conventional interpretation of this phenomenon is that the receptive field properties illustrated in Figures 10.14 through 10.17 cause ganglion cells to fire differently depending on whether the surround of the equiluminant target is dark or light. The demonstration in An alternative interpretation of luminance perception that can account for these puzzling phenomena is that brightness percepts are generated on a statistical basis as a means of contending with the inherent ambiguity of luminance (i.e., the fact that a given value of luminance can be generated by many different combinations of illumination and surface reflectance properties). Since to be successful an observer has to respond to the real-world sources of luminance and not to light intensity as such, this ambiguity of the retinal stimulus presents a quandary. A plausible solution to discharge, and when the spot of light is turned off, the cell responds with a burst of action potentials On-and off-center ganglion cells are present in roughly equal numbers. The receptive fields have overlapping distributions, so that every point on the retinal surface (that is, every part of visual space) is analyzed by several on-center and several off-center ganglion cells. A rationale for having these two distinct types of retinal ganglion cells was suggested by Peter Schiller and his colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who examined the effects of pharmacologically inactivating on-center ganglion cells on a monkey's ability to detect a variety of visual stimuli. After silencing oncenter ganglion cells, the animals showed a deficit in their ability to detect stimuli that were brighter than the background; however, they could still see objects that were darker than the background.These observations imply that information about increases or decreases in luminance is carried separately to the brain by the axons of these two different types of retinal ganglion cells. Having separate luminance "channels" means that changes in light intensity, whether increases or decreases, are always conveyed to the brain by an increased number of action potentials. Because ganglion cells rapidly adapt to changes in luminance, their "resting" discharge rate in constant illumination is relatively low. Although an increase in discharge rate above resting level serves as a reliable signal, a decrease in firing rate from an initially low rate of discharge might not. Thus, having luminance changes signaled by two classes of adaptable cells provides unambiguous information about both luminance increments and decrements.The functional differences between these two ganglion cell types can be understood in terms of both their anatomy and their physiological properVision: The Eye 251 the inherent uncertainty of the relationship between luminance values and their actual sources would be to generate the sensation of brightness elicited by a given luminance (e.g., in the brightness of the identical test patches in the The selective response of on-and off-center bipolar cells to light increments and decrements is explained by the fact that they express different types of glutamate receptors Kuffler's work also called attention to the fact that retinal ganglion cells do not act as simple photodetectors. Indeed, most ganglion cells are relatively poor at signaling differences in the level of diffuse illumination. Instead, they are sensitive to differences between the level of illumination that falls on the receptive field center and the level of illumination that falls on the surround-that is, to luminance contrast. The center of a ganglion cell receptive field is surrounded by a concentric region that, when stimulated, antagonizes the response to stimulation of the receptive field center (see To appreciate how center-surround antagonism makes the ganglion cell sensitive to luminance contrast, consider the activity levels in a hypothetical population of on-center ganglion cells whose receptive fields are distributed across a retinal image of a light-dark edge In addition to making ganglion cells especially sensitive to light-dark borders in the visual scene, center-surround mechanisms make a significant contribution to the process of light adaptation. As illustrated for an on-center cell in Because the range of light intensities over which we can see is enormous compared to the narrow range of ganglion cell discharge rates (see Like the mechanism responsible for generating the on-and off-center response, the antagonistic surround of ganglion cells is a product of interactions that occur at the early stages of retinal processing Glutamate release from photoreceptor terminals has a depolarizing effect on horizontal cells (sign-conserving synapse), while the transmitter released from horizontal cells (GABA) has a hyperpolarizing influence on photoreceptor terminals (sign-inverting synapse) Thus, even at the earliest stages in visual processing, neural signals do not represent the absolute numbers of photons that are captured by receptors, but rather the relative intensity of stimulation-how much the current level of stimulation differs from ambient levels. While it may seem that the actions of horizontal cells decrease the sensitivity of the retina, they play a critical role in allowing the full range of the photoreceptor's electrical response (about 30 mV) to be applied to the limited range of stimulus intensities that are present at any given moment. The network mechanisms of adaptation described here function in conjunction with cellular mechanisms in the receptor outer segments that regulate the sensitivity of the phototransduction cascade at different light levels. Together, they allow retinal circuits to convey the most salient aspects of luminance changes to the central stages of the visual system described in the following chapter.The light that falls on photoreceptors is transformed by retinal circuitry into a pattern of action potentials that ganglion cell axons convey to the visual centers in the brain. This process begins with phototransduction, a biochemical cascade that ultimately regulates the opening and closing of ion channels in the membrane of the photoreceptor's outer segment, and thereby the amount of neurotransmitter the photoreceptor releases. Two systems of photoreceptors-rods and cones-allow the visual system to meet the conflicting demands of sensitivity and acuity, respectively. Retinal ganglion cells operate quite differently from the photoreceptor cells. The centersurround arrangement of ganglion cell receptive fields makes these neurons particularly sensitive to luminance contrast and relatively insensitive to the overall level of illumination. It also allows the retina to adapt, such that it can respond effectively over the enormous range of illuminant intensities in the world. The underlying organization is generated by the synaptic interactions between photoreceptors, horizontal cells, and bipolar cells in the outer plexiform layer. As a result, the signal sent to the visual centers in the brain is already highly processed when it leaves the retina, emphasizing those aspects of the visual scene that convey the most information.Information supplied by the retina initiates interactions between multiple subdivisions of the brain that eventually lead to conscious perception of the visual scene, at the same time stimulating more conventional reflexes such as adjusting the size of the pupil, directing the eyes to targets of interest, and regulating homeostatic behaviors that are tied to the day/night cycle. The pathways and structures that mediate this broad range of functions are necessarily diverse. Of these, the primary visual pathway from the retina to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus in the thalamus and on to the primary visual cortex is the most important and certainly the most thoroughly studied component of the visual system. Different classes of neurons within this pathway encode the varieties of visual information-luminance, spectral differences, orientation, and motion-that we ultimately see. The parallel processing of different categories of visual information continues in cortical pathways that extend beyond primary visual cortex, supplying a variety of visual areas in the occipital, parietal, and temporal lobes. Visual areas in the temporal lobe are primarily involved in object recognition, whereas those in the parietal lobe are concerned with motion. Normal vision depends on the integration of information in all these cortical areas. The processes underlying visual perception are not understood and remain one of the central challenges of modern neuroscience.Ganglion cell axons exit the retina through a circular region in its nasal part called the optic disk (or optic papilla), where they bundle together to form the optic nerve. This region of the retina contains no photoreceptors and, because it is insensitive to light, produces the perceptual phenomenon known as the blind spot (Box A). The optic disk is easily identified as a whitish circular area when the retina is examined with an ophthalmoscope; it also is recognized as the site from which the ophthalmic artery and veins enter (or leave) the eye Axons in the optic nerve run a straight course to the optic chiasm at the base of the diencephalon. In humans, about 60% of these fibers cross in the chiasm, while the other 40% continue toward the thalamus and midbrain targets on the same side. Once past the chiasm, the ganglion cell axons on eachside form the optic tract. Thus, the optic tract, unlike the optic nerve, contains fibers from both eyes. The partial crossing (or decussation) of ganglion cell axons at the optic chiasm allows information from corresponding points on the two retinas to be processed by approximately the same cortical site in each hemisphere, an important issue that is considered in the next section.The ganglion cell axons in the optic tract reach a number of structures in the diencephalon and midbrain A second major target of the ganglion cell axons is a collection of neurons that lies between the thalamus and the midbrain in a region known as the pretectum. Although small in size compared to the lateral geniculate nucleus, the pretectum is particularly important as the coordinating center for the pupillary light reflex (i.e., the reduction in the diameter of the pupil that occurs when sufficient light falls on the retina) In addition to its normal role in regulating the amount of light that enters the eye, the pupillary reflex provides an important diagnostic tool that allows the physician to test the integrity of the visual sensory apparatus, the motor outflow to the pupillary muscles, and the central pathways that medi-  It is logical to suppose that a visual field defect (called a scotoma) arising from damage to the retina or central visual pathways would be obvious to the individual suffering from such pathology. When the deficit involves a peripheral region of the visual field, however, a scotoma often goes unnoticed until a car accident or some other mishap all too dramatically reveals the sensory loss. In fact, all of us have a physiological scotoma of which we are quite unaware, the so-called "blind spot." The blind spot is the substantial gap in each monocular visual field that corresponds to the location of the optic disk, the receptor-free region of the retina where the optic nerve leaves the eye (see To find the "blind spot" of the right eye, close the left eye and fixate on the X shown in the figure here, holding the book about 30-40 centimeters away. Now take a pencil in your right hand and, without breaking fixation, move the tip slowly toward the X from the right side of the page. At some point, the tip of the pencil (indeed the whole end of the pencil) will disappear; mark this point and continue to move the pencil to the left until it reappears; then make another mark. The borders of the blind spot along the vertical axis can be determined in the same way by moving the pencil up and down so that its path falls between the two horizontal marks. To prove that information from the region of visual space bounded by the marks is really not perceived, put a penny inside the demarcated area. When you fixate the X with both eyes and then close the left eye, the penny will disappear, a seemingly magical event that amazed the French royal court when it was first reported by the natural philosopher Edmé Mariotte in 1668.How can we be unaware of such a large defect in the visual field (typically about 5°-8°)? The optic disk is located in the nasal retina of each eye. With both eyes open, information about the corresponding region of visual space is, of course, available from the temporal retina of the other eye. But this fact does not explain why the blind spot remains undetected with one eye closed. When the world is viewed monocularly, the visual system appears to "fill-in" the missing part of the scene based on the information supplied by the regions surrounding the optic disk. To observe this phenomenon, notice what happens when a pencil or some other object lies across the optic disk representation. Remarkably, the pencil looks complete! Although electrophysiological recordings have shown that neurons in the visual cortex whose receptive fields lie in the optic disk representation can be activated by stimulating the regions that surround the optic disk of the contralateral eye, suggesting that "filling-in" the blind spot is based on cortical mechanisms that integrate information from different points in the visual field, the mechanism of this striking phenomenon is not clear. Herman von Helmholtz pointed out in the nineteenth century that it may just be that this part of the visual world is ignored, the pencil being completed across the blind spot because the rest of the scene simply "collapses" around it.X ate the reflex. Under normal conditions, the pupils of both eyes respond identically, regardless of which eye is stimulated; that is, light in one eye produces constriction of both the stimulated eye (the direct response) and the unstimulated eye (the consensual response; see There are several other important targets of retinal ganglion cell axons. One is the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus, a small group of neurons at the base of the diencephalon (see Box A in Chapter 20). The retinohypothalamic pathway is the route by which variation in light levels influences the broad spectrum of visceral functions that are entrained to the day/night cycle (see Chapters 20 and 27). Another target is the superior colliculus, a prominent structure visible on the dorsal surface of the midbrain (see The type of visual information required to perform the functions of these different retinal targets is quite different. Reading the text on this page, for example, requires a high-resolution sampling of the retinal image, whereas regulating circadian rhythms and adjusting the pupil accordingly require only a measure of overall changes in light levels, and little or no information about the features of the image. It should come as no surprise, then, that there is a diversity of ganglion cell types that provide information appropriate to the functions of these different targets.Projections to the lateral geniculate nucleus (which are described in more detail later) arise from at least three broad classes of ganglion cells, whose tuning properties are appropriate for mediating the richness of visual perception (high acuity, color, motion). In contrast, projections to the hypothalamus and the pretectum arise from ganglion cells that lack these properties and are highly suited for detecting luminance flux. The retinal specializations responsible for constructing these distinct classes of retinal ganglion cells are only beginning to be identified; they include not only differences in ganglion cell synaptic connections, but in the locus of the phototransduction event itself. Unlike the majority of ganglion cells, which depend on rods and cones for their sensitivity to light, the ganglion cells that project to the hypothalamus and pretectum express their own light-sensitive photopigment (melanopsin) and are capable of modulating their response to changes in light levels in the absence of signals from rods and cones. The presence of light sensitivity within this class of ganglion cells presumably explains why normal circadian rhythms are maintained in animals that have completely lost form vision due to degeneration of rod and cone photoreceptors.The spatial relationships among the ganglion cells in the retina are maintained in most of their central targets as orderly representations or "maps" of visual space. Most of these structures receive information from both eyes, requiring that these inputs be integrated to form a coherent map of individ- ual points in space. As a general rule, information from the left half of the visual world, whether it originates from the left or right eye, is represented in the right half of the brain, and vice versa.Understanding the neural basis for the appropriate arrangement of inputs from the two eyes requires considering how images are projected onto the two retinas, and the central destination of the ganglion cells located in different parts of the retina. Each eye sees a part of visual space that defines its visual field With both eyes open, the two foveas are normally aligned on a single target in visual space, causing the visual fields of both eyes to overlap extensively (see Optic tract axons terminate in an orderly fashion within their target structures thus generating well ordered maps of the contralateral hemifield. For the primary visual pathway, the map of the contralateral hemifield that is established in the lateral geniculate nucleus is maintained in the projections of the lateral geniculate nucleus to the striate cortex A variety of retinal or more central pathologies that involve the primary visual pathway can cause visual field deficits that are limited to particular regions of visual space. Because the spatial relationships in the retinas are maintained in central visual structures, a careful analysis of the visual fields can often indicate the site of neurological damage. Relatively large visual field deficits are called anopsias and smaller ones are called scotomas (see Box A). The former term is combined with various prefixes to indicate the specific region of the visual field from which sight has been lost (Figures 11.7 and 11.8).Damage to the retina or one of the optic nerves before it reaches the chiasm results in a loss of vision that is limited to the eye of origin. In contrast, damage in the region of the optic chiasm-or more centrally-results in specific types of deficits that involve the visual fields of both eyes Damage to central visual structures is rarely complete. As a result, the deficits associated with damage to the chiasm, optic tract, optic radiation, or visual cortex are typically more limited than those shown in Hubel and Wiesel also found that there are subtly different subtypes within a class of neurons that preferred the same orientation. For example, the receptive fields of some cortical cells, which they called simple cells, were composed of spatially separate "on" and "off" response zones, as if the "on" and "off" centers of lateral geniculate cells that supplied these neurons were arrayed in separate parallel bands. Other neurons, referred to as complex cells, exhibited mixed "on" and "off" responses throughout their receptive field, as if they received their inputs from a number of simple cells. Further analysis uncovered cortical neurons sensitive to the length of the bar of light that was moved across their receptive field, decreasing their rate of response when the bar exceeded a certain length. Still other cells responded selectively to the direction in which an edge moved across their receptive field. Although the mechanisms responsible for generating these selective responses are still not well understood, there is little doubt that the specificity of the receptive field properties of neurons in the striate cortex (and beyond) plays an important role in determining the basic attributes of visual scenes.Another feature that distinguishes the responses of neurons in the striate cortex from those at earlier stages in the primary visual pathway is binocularity. Although the lateral geniculate nucleus receives inputs from both eyes, the axons terminate in separate layers, so that individual geniculate neurons are monocular, driven by either the left or right eye but not by both Although the neurophysiological basis of stereopsis is not understood, some neurons in the striate cortex and in other visual cortical areas have receptive field properties that make them good candidates for extracting information about binocular disparity. Unlike many binocular cells whose monocular receptive fields sample the same region of visual space, these neurons have monocular fields that are slightly displaced (or perhaps differ in their internal organization) so that the cell is maximally activated by stimuli that fall on noncorresponding parts of the retinas. Some of these neurons (so-called far cells) discharge to disparities beyond the plane of fixation, while others (near cells) respond to disparities in front of the plane of fixation. The pattern of activity in these different classes of neurons seems likely to contribute to sensations of stereoscopic depth (Box B).Interestingly, the preservation of the binocular responses of cortical neurons is contingent on the normal activity from the two eyes during early postnatal life. Anything that creates an imbalance in the activity of the two eyes-for example, the clouding of one lens or the abnormal alignment of the eyes during infancy (strabismus)-can permanently reduce the effectiveness of one eye in driving cortical neurons, and thus impair the ability to use binocular information as a cue for depth. Early detection and correction of visual problems is therefore essential for normal visual function in maturity (see Chapter 23).The variety of response properties exhibited by cortical neurons raises the question of how neurons with different receptive fields are arranged within striate cortex. For the most part, the responses of neurons are qualitatively An important advance in studies of stereopsis was made in 1959 when Bela Julesz, then working at the Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey, discovered an ingenious way of showing that stereoscopy depends on matching information seen by the two eyes without any prior recognition of what object(s) such matching might generate. Julesz, a Hungarian whose background was in engineering and physics, was working on the problem of how to "break" camouflage. He surmised that the brain's ability to fuse the slightly different views of the two eyes to bring out new information would be an aid in overcoming military camouflage. Julesz also realized that, if his hypothesis was correct, a hidden figure in a random pattern presented to the two eyes should emerge when a portion of the otherwise identical pattern was shifted horizontally in the view of one eye or the other. A horizontal shift in one direction would cause the hidden object to appear in front of the plane of the background, whereas a shift in the other direction would cause the hidden object to appear in back of the plane. Such a figure, called a random dot stereogram, and the method of its creation are shown in An impressive-and extraordinarily popular-derivative of the random dot stereogram is the autostereogram ( Binocular fusion produces sensation that the shifted square is in front of the background plane.Random dot stereograms and autostereograms. (A) to construct a random dot stereogram, a random dot pattern is created to be observed by one eye. The stimulus for the other eye is created by copying the first image, displacing a particular region horizontally, and then filling in the gap with a random sample of dots. (B) When the right and left images are viewed simultaneously but independently by the two eyes (by using a stereoscope or fusing the images by converging or diverging the eyes), the shifted region (a square) appears to be in a different plane from the other dots. (A after The elevation of the autostereogram to a popular art form should probably be attributed to Chris W. Tyler, a student of Julesz's and a visual psychophysicist, who was among the first to create commercial autostereograms. Numerous graphic artists-preeminently in Japan, where the popularity of the autostereogram has been enormous-have generated many of such images. As with the random dot stereogram, the task in viewing the autostereogram is not clear to the observer. Nonetheless, the hidden figure emerges, often after minutes of effort in which the brain automatically tries to make sense of the occult information.location (Box C). Unlike the map of visual space, however, the map of orientation preference is iterated many times, such that the same orientation preference is repeated at approximately 1-mm intervals across the striate cortex. This iteration presumably ensures that there are neurons for each region of visual space that represent the full range of orientation values. The orderly progression of orientation preference (as well as other properties that are mapped in this systematic way) is accommodated within the orderly map of visual space by the fact that the mapping is relatively coarse. Each small region of visual space is represented by a set of neurons whose receptive fields cover the full range of orientation preferences, the set being distributed over several millimeters of the cortical surfaceThe columnar organization of the striate cortex is equally apparent in the binocular responses of cortical neurons. Although most neurons in the striate cortex respond to stimulation of both eyes, the relative strength of the inputs from the two eyes varies from neuron to neuron. At the extremes of this continuum are neurons that respond almost exclusively to the left or right eye; in the middle are those that respond equally well to both eyes. As in the case of orientation preference, vertical electrode penetrations tend to encounter neurons with similar ocular preference (or ocular dominance, as it is usually called), whereas tangential penetrations show gradual shifts in ocular dominance. And, like the arrangement of orientation preference, a movement of about a millimeter across the surface is required to sample the full complement of ocular dominance values Although the modular arrangement of the visual cortex was first recognized on the basis of these orientation and ocular dominance columns, further work has shown that other stimulus features such as color, direction of motion, and spatial frequency also tend to be distributed in iterated patterns that are systematically related to each other (for example, orientation columns tend to intersect ocular dominance columns at right angles). In short, the striate cortex is composed of repeating units, or modules, that contain all the neuronal machinery necessary to analyze a small region of visual space for a variety of different stimulus attributes. As described in Box D in Chapter 8, a number of other cortical regions show a similar columnar arrangement of their processing circuitry.  In addition to being specific for input from one eye or the other, the layers in the lateral geniculate are also distinguished on the basis of cell size: Two ventral layers are composed of large neurons and are referred to as the magnocellular layers, while more dorsal layers are composed of small neurons and are referred to as the parvocellular layers. The magno-and parvocellular layers receive inputs from distinct populations of ganglion cells that exhibit corresponding differences in cell size. M ganglion cells that terminate in the magnocellular layers have larger cell bodies, more extensive dendritic fields, and larger-diameter axons than the P ganglion cells that terminate in the parvocellular layers The response properties of the M and P ganglion cells provide important clues about the contributions of the magno-and parvocellular streams to visual perception. M ganglion cells have larger receptive fields than P cells, and their axons have faster conduction velocities. M and P ganglion cells also differ in ways that are not so obviously related to their morphology. M cells respond transiently to the presentation of visual stimuli, while P cells respond in a sustained fashion. Moreover, P ganglion cells can transmit information about color, whereas M cells cannot. P cells convey color information because their receptive field centers and surrounds are driven by different classes of cones (i.e., cones responding with greatest sensitivity to The recent availability of optical imaging techniques has made it possible to visualize how response properties, such as the selectivity for edge orientation or ocular dominance, are mapped across the cortical surface. These methods generally rely on intrinsic signals (changes in the amount of light reflected from the cortical surface) that correlate with levels of neural activity. Such signals are thought to arise at least in part from local changes in the ratio of oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin that accompany such activity, more active areas having a higher deoxyhemoglobin/oxyhemoglobin ratio (see also Box A in Chapter 1). This change can be detected when the cortical surface is illuminated with red light (605-700 nm). Under these conditions, active cortical regions absorb more light than less active ones. With the use of a sensitive video camera, and averaging over a number of trials (the changes are small, 1 or 2 parts per thousand), it is possible to visualize these differences and use them to map cortical patterns of activity ( This powerful technique can also be used to determine how maps for different stimulus properties are arranged relative to one another, and to detect additional maps such as that for direction of motion. A comparison of ocular dominance bands and orientation preference maps, for example, shows that pinwheel centers are generally located in the center of ocular dominance bands, and that the iso-orientation contours that emanate from the pinwheel centers run orthogonal to the borders of ocular dominance bands ( The contribution of the magno-and parvocellular streams to visual perception has been tested experimentally by examining the visual capabilities of monkeys after selectively damaging either the magno-or parvocellular layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus. Damage to the magnocellular layers has little effect on visual acuity or color vision, but sharply reduces the ability to perceive rapidly changing stimuli. In contrast, damage to the parvocellular layers has no effect on motion perception but severely impairs visual acuity and color perception. These observations suggest that the visual information conveyed by the parvocellular stream is particularly important for high spatial resolution vision-the detailed analysis of the shape, size, and color of objects. The magnocellular stream, on the other hand, appears critical for tasks that require high temporal resolution, such as evaluating the location, speed and direction of a rapidly moving object.In addition to the magno-and parvocellular streams, a third distinct anatomical pathway-the koniocellular, or K-cell pathway-has been identified within the lateral geniculate nucleus. Neurons contributing to the Kcell pathway reside in the interlaminar zones that separate lateral geniculate layers; these neurons receive inputs from fine-caliber retinal axons and project in a patchy fashion to the superficial layers (layers II and III) of striate cortex. Although the contribution of the K-cell pathway to perception is not understood, it appears that some aspects of color vision, especially information derived from short-wavelength-sensitive cones, may be transmitted via the K-cell rather than the P-cell pathway. Why short-wavelength-sensitive cone signals should be processed differently from middle-and long-wavelength information is not clear, but the distinction may reflect the earlier evolutionary origin of the K-cell pathway (see Chapter 10).Anatomical and electrophysiological studies in monkeys have led to the discovery of a multitude of areas in the occipital, parietal, and temporal lobes that are involved in processing visual information Recent functional imaging studies have indicated a similar arrangement of visual areas within human extrastriate cortex. Using retinotopically restricted stimuli, it has been possible to localize at least 10 separate representations of the visual field The clinical description of selective visual deficits after localized damage to various regions of extrastriate cortex also supports functional specialization of extrastriate visual areas in humans. For example, a well-studied patient who suffered a stroke that damaged the extrastriate region thought to be comparable to area MT in the monkey was unable to appreciate the motion of objects. The neurologist who treated her noted that she had difficulty in pouring tea into a cup because the fluid seemed to be "frozen." In addition, she could not stop pouring at the right time because she was unable to perceive when the fluid level had risen to the brim. The patient also had trouble following a dialogue because she could not follow the movements of the speaker's mouth. Crossing the street was potentially terrifying because she couldn't judge the movement of approaching cars. As the patient related, "When I'm looking at the car first, it seems far away. But  Another example of a specific visual deficit as a result of damage to extrastriate cortex is cerebral achromatopsia. These patients lose the ability to see the world in color, although other aspects of vision remain in good working order. The normal colors of a visual scene are described as being replaced by "dirty" shades of gray, much like looking at a poor quality black-and-white movie. Achromatopsic individuals know the normal colors of objects-that a school bus is yellow, an apple red-but can no longer see them. Thus, when asked to draw objects from memory, they have no difficulty with shapes but are unable to appropriately color the objects they have represented. It is important to distinguish this condition from the color blindness that arises from the congenital absence of one or more cone pigments in the retina (see Chapter 10). In achromatopsia, the three types of cones are functioning normally; it is damage to specific extrastriate cortical areas that renders the patient unable to use the information supplied by the retina.  