Copyright Elsevier BVThe fundamental premise of contemporary neuroscience is that cells in the nervous systems of multicellular organisms interact to produce this range of behaviors, as well as many others. Various metaphors have been introduced over the centuries to conceptualize how the nervous system produces this amazing array of behaviors. Early speculations considered, for example, that the elements of the nervous system were thin pipes that conducted fluids.However, a theme that developed during the 20 th century was that the cells in the nervous system function in analogy to human-made computing devices. In this metaphor, the nervous system is a computational device and nerve cells, or neurons, are involved in sequences of complex computations. Neurons interact with each other through synapses, which can be either excitatory or inhibitory.Individual neurons receive inputs from many, neighboring neurons. The inputs are integrated and result in electrical signals that are sent, in turn, to other neurons. Neurons are, in many instances, grouped into functional units, or circuits that are, then, the fundamental computational units of the nervous system. Circuits, in turn, can be combined to form large, interacting networks of neurons. An overall goal in neuroscience is to understand how the properties of individual neurons and neuronal circuits determine organismal behavior. This approach to thinking about the function of the nervous system has come to be called computational neurobiology or computational neuroscience and is the subject of this book. This chapter reviews the history of the concept that neurons function as computational devices, setting the stage for detailed discussions in the following chapters.The idea that the nervous system is composed of cells similar to those present in other body tissues was controversial until the 20 th century. Plants and suggested that plant tissues are composed of fundamental units, or cells. He extended this idea to include animal tissues in collaboration with Theodeus Schwann (1839), who was studying spinal cord tissue. Subsequent workers described cells in various regions of the nervous system. However, the methods available for staining nervous tissue at that time were not able to clearly delineate the structural elements of nervous tissue. It quickly became clear that nerve cells have long, thin processes which came to be called dendrites and axons, but it was difficult to understand the origin and termination of these processes. Workers such as Albrecht von A breakthrough came when the Italian anatomist, Camillio Golgi (1873), introduced a new method of staining tissue. His method depended upon fixing the tissue with agents such as osmium tetroxide and then soaking the tissue in silver salts.It turns out that the "Golgi method" impregnates or fills membrane-bound spaces with silver precipitates. Thus, Golgi was able to identify the Golgi apparatus in several different types of cells. impregnate only a fraction of the nerve cells.Individual cells can be impregnated in their entirety and the processes of nerve cells could be clearly traced in Golgi preparations. The Spanish microscopist, Santiago Ramón y Cajal, applied Golgi's methods to a wide range of nervous tissues from both invertebrates and vertebrates. His first paper, published in 1889, dealt with the cerebellum of birds and contains a drawing ( (See Rall Axons of the CA3 pyramidal cells give rise to several collaterals, some of which (known as the Schaffer collaterals after the German anatomist who first described them) course to the left in the drawing and intersect the apical dendrite of a second variety of hippocampal pyramidal cell located in hippocampal field CA1. This pyramidal cell is more slender than the CA3 pyramidal cell The somata of both sets of pyramidal cells are packed together in a tight layer within the hippocampus and their dendrites are in precise alignment. Axon systems --such as the mossy fibers or the Schaffer collaterals --running though the hippocampus consequently intersect  The hippocampal tri-synaptic circuit is an example of groups of two or more neurons that can be reasonably regarded as neuronal circuits.It demonstrates the general feature that the formation of circuits often depends upon the details of the anatomy and physiology of the neurons. There is, for example, a striking tendency for axons in the hippocampus to run within distinct layers and contact specific domains of their target neurons. We will now consider how such circuits can be regarded as implementing "computations".The idea that neural circuits may be conceived as carrying out To construct a McCulloch-Pitts neuron that computes "and", we give the neuron two inputs, set w 1 = w 2 = 1 and θ = 2. This neuron will generate an output O = 1 if, and only if, the two inputs are 1. It is easy to construct a McCulloch-Pitts neuron that computes the logical function "inclusive or" which is true if either one, or both, of the propositions are The networks of neurons that McCulloch and Pitts described were static in the sense that the weights of the synapses (the w i 's) were fixed. The network was, thus, designed to compute one specific function. However, subsequent work considered networks that could learn to compute specific functions (or be trained to carry out specific tasks).  Hebb also considered how such cell assemblies could be formed and suggested that they might develop through repeated stimulus patterns. He suggested that any two cells, or systems of cells, that are repeatedly active at the same time would tend to become "associated", so that activity in one one cell facilitates activity in the other. Hebb did not know how this process of association might be achieved at the cellular level, but he did suspect that it involved strengthening synapses. The idea has come to be called Hebb's postulate and synapses that are strengthened in this way are "Hebbian"synapses. The mechanisms underlying this process are still not completely known and remain an active area of research. However, the concept of modifiable, or plastic, synapses was key to the development of artificial neural networks.The first step towards artificial neural networks was made by F.Rosenblatt who introduced networks that he called perceptrons in a 1958paper Artificial neural networks have proven to be very useful tools in areas of inquiry as disparate as economics and astrophysics. However, any sense of biological reality was lost along the way so that artificial neural networks are mathematical tools. They are useful in modeling some aspects of neural function and behavior, but do not give insights into how real neurons process real inputs. Artificial neural nets will, then, not be discussed further in this book. The interested reader is referred to texts such as Haykin (1999).In this last section of Chapter 1, we return to the McCulloch -Pitts paper and trace the impact of their ideas on concepts of computation in real neurons.It is important to emphasize that McCulloch-Pitts neurons differ in several important ways from real, biological neurons. The first is that they do calculations in discrete time steps. All of the inputs to the neuron are activated at the same time, the weighted sum is calculated and the output is However, the stimuli that had been used were principally flashes of light.Lettvin and his colleagues argued that the visual system most likely evolved to respond to complex visual stimuli that were important in the natural behavior of the animal instead of simple flashes of light. They, consequently, designed a series of experiments in which they recorded from axons in the optic nerve as it leaves the back of the frog's eye. These are axons of the retinal ganglion cells which send information from the eye to the brain. Recordings were made while the animal was presented with stimuli that were selected to resemble objects that might occur in the animal's natural environment. One stimulus, for example, was a small, round object chosen because it would resemble a fly or other insect that would be a suitable prey for the frog. The result was that different individual ganglion cell axons responded to different stimuli. This suggested that retinal ganglion cells are able to recognize or compute specific features of visual stimuli that are behaviorally important. Maturana studied the anatomy of frog retinal ganglion cells and discovered that he could establish tentative correlations between the shape and size of ganglion cells and their physiological properties. Circuits of neurons in the retina, thus, could be viewed as carrying out behaviorally significant computations on the patterns of light that fall upon the retinal surface. We will follow the further development of this approach in Part III of this book.