Copyright Frontiers Media SAConnectivity studies in animals form the basis for a representational view of medial temporal lobe (MTL) subregions. In this view, distinct subfields of the entorhinal cortex (EC) relay object-related and spatial information from the perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices (PRC, PHC) to the hippocampus (HC). Relatively recent advances in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) methodology allow examining properties of human EC subregions directly. Antero-lateral and posterior-medial EC subfields show remarkable consistency to their putative rodent and nonhuman primate homologs with regard to intra-and extra-MTL functional connectivity. Accordingly, there is now evidence for a dissociation of object-related vs. spatial processing in human EC subfields. Here, variance in localization may be integrated in the anterolateral vs. posterior-medial distinction, but may additionally reflect process differences. Functional results in rodents further suggest material-specific representations may be more integrated in EC compared to PRC/PHC. In humans, however, evidence for such a dissociation between EC and PRC/PHC is lacking. Future research may elucidate on the unique contributions of human EC to memory, especially in light of its high degree of intrinsic and extrinsic connectivity. A thorough characterization of EC subfield function may not only advance our understanding of human memory, but also have important clinical implications.A small structure embedded in the anterior temporal lobe Studies in humans underline its importance for memory: EC may be affected early in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment Importantly, EC is not a homogeneous region. In animals as in humans, EC contains a number of cytoarchitectonically defined subfields Anatomical connectivity studies in rodents and nonhuman primates have informed functional accounts of MTL information processing, particularly with respect to memory In animals, MTL [including PRC, PHC, and EC subregions, often denoted lateral and medial EC (LEC, MEC)] is organized in parallel circuits: An anterior circuit connects PRC to LEC, while a posterior circuit connects PHC to MEC MEC are in turn connected to hippocampal subfields CA1 and subiculum, albeit distinct parts of these, respectively While fundamental aspects of human MTL functional connectivity-e.g., preferential connectivity of anterior MTL to ventral visual regions, and posterior MTL to dorsal visual regions-may resemble anatomical connectivity in animals These results converge on a compartmentalization of human EC into antero-lateral vs. posterior-medial subregions. According to By now, it is well-established that human PRC and PHC-major input regions into the EC-may support encoding On the other hand, two earlier high-resolution 3T fMRI studies emphasized a lateral vs. medial EC distinction, with material-specific differences in mnemonic processing These findings are not necessarily at odds with the anterolateral vs. posterior-medial EC distinction Recently observed dissociations between object-related vs. spatial processing in human EC subregions are not unique to the EC: material-specific retrieval in lateral vs. medial EC Information represented in EC likely does not overlap completely with that in PRC/PHC: In animals, some projections to EC from ventral and dorsal visual regions are direct rather than relayed through PRC/PHC, and in turn some projections from PRC/PHC to HC bypass EC Additionally, a high degree of intrinsic EC connectivity across subfield boundaries Spatial activity in MEC, unlike PHC, may be partially supported by grid cell activity, as discussed above. EC grid cells may be part of both navigation and memory circuits In sum, material-specific representations in both rodent LEC and MEC may differ from those in PRC and PHC. On these grounds, it has been argued that rodent LEC vs. MEC process content vs. (spatial) context, with LEC computing object-related and spatial processing within a local reference frame and MEC providing a global spatial reference frame Finally, while we focused on different memory representations based on visual input, EC receives more than just object-related and spatial information. As just one example, regions implicated in reward and emotion project directly to EC Recent evidence suggests that human EC may be divided into antero-lateral vs. posterior-medial subfields with objectrelated vs. spatial preferences, in line with the animal literature. This reinforces a representational MTL model of memory, in which the HC receives object-related information from ventral visual areas via PRC and (antero-lateral) EC, and spatial information from dorsal visual areas via PHC and (posterior-medial) EC This work was supported by a grant of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (PE-1627/2-1) to JP and TS.The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The Review Editor Kelly Giovanello declares that, despite being affiliated with the same institution as the Associate Editor Charlotte Boettiger, the review process was handled objectively.Copyright © 2015 Schultz, Sommer and Peters. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution and reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.