Copyright Oxford University PressThe synapse is the primary place at which information is transmitted from neuron to neuron or from neuron to peripheral target, be it a gland or a muscle. Most synapses rely on a chemical intermediary, or transmitter, secreted in response to an action potential in the presynaptic cell in order to infl uence the activity of the postsynaptic cell. In chemical transmission, a single action potential in a small presynaptic terminal can generate a large postsynaptic potential. This is accomplished by the release of thousands to hundreds of thousands of molecules of transmitter that can bind to postsynaptic receptor molecules and open thousands of ion channels in about 1 ms. The effect can be either excitatory or inhibitory, depending on the ions that permeate the channels operated by the receptor. The resulting responses are either excitatory postsynaptic potentials or inhibitory postsynaptic potentials, depending on whether they drive the cell toward a point above or below its fi ring threshold, as discussed in Chapter 11.Why are most synapses chemical The simpler alternative might appear to be the electrical synapse in which the electrical signal from one cell can cross directly into the next through the electrically conducting pathway of the gap junction. Even when pre-and postsynaptic elements are coupled in this manner, however, a presynaptic spike of 100 mV would likely cause only a 1-mV change in the postsynaptic cell because relatively little charge can fl ow through these junctions to charge the large membrane capacitance of the postsynaptic cell. More effi cient electrical transfer requires that the presynaptic terminal be as large as or larger than the postsynaptic element and therefore only a few presynaptic cells could converge on a given postsynaptic cell. Such synapses would further limit the computational capacity of the brain because they could only induce excitation, not inhibition, in response to a presynaptic action potential. Chemical synapses are characterized by great fl exibility. Different afferents can have different effects, with different strengths and time courses, on each other as well as on postsynaptic cells. These differences depend on the identity of the transmitter released and the receptors present. Chemical synapses often are modifi ed by prior activity in the presynaptic neuron. Chemical synapses are also particularly subject to the modulation of presynaptic ion channels by substances released by the postsynaptic or neighboring neurons. This fl exibility is essential for the complex processing of information that neural circuits must accomplish, and it provides an important locus for modifying neural circuits in adaptive processes such as learning.In order to secrete thousands of transmitter molecules rapidly and simultaneously, nerve terminals, like other secretory cells, package the transmitter into membrane-enclosed organelles. When one of these synaptic vesicles fuses with the plasma membrane, the contents of the vesicle can diffuse into the extracellular space and encounter receptors on the postsynaptic cell within hundreds of microseconds. A consequence of releasing transmitter by the fusion of vesicles with the plasma membrane is that synaptic transmission is quantal-responses are built from signals with a discrete amplitude corresponding to a single vesicle. In the absence of presynaptic electrical activity, transmitter is released spontaneously as individual quanta. Each packet generates a small postsynaptic signaleither a miniature excitatory or a miniature inhibitory postsynaptic potential-that can be detected by microelectrode recording The anatomical specializations of the synapse and the properties of the presynaptic ion channels and postsynaptic receptors unite to achieve fast, quantal transmission. The chief anatomical feature of the terminal is the profusion of synaptic FIGURE 8.1 Ultrastructural images of exocytosis and active zones. Synapses from frog sartorius neuromuscular junctions were quick-frozen milliseconds after stimulation in conditions that enhance transmission. A thin section showing vesicles clustered in the active zone some docked at the membrane. Shortly after stimulation, vesicles were seen to fuse with the plasma membrane. After freezing, presynaptic membranes were freezefractured and a platinum replica was made of the external face of the cytoplasmic membrane leafl et. Vesicles fuse about 50 nm from rows of intramembranous particles thought to include Ca 2 channels. The fi ne structure of the active zone at a frog neuromuscular junction as seen with electron tomography. In a cross-sectional image from tomographic data, two vesicles are docked at the plasma membrane and additional electron-dense elements are seen. When these structures are traced and reconstructed through the volume of the EM section, proteins of the active zone appear to form a regular structure adjacent to the membrane that connects the synaptic vesicles and plasma membrane. Viewed from the cytoplasmic side, proteins are seen to extend from the vesicles and connect in the center. Schematic rendering of an active zone based on tomographic analysis. An ordered structure aligns the vesicles and connects them to the plasma membrane and to one another. The life cycle of synaptic vesicles. Transmitter-fi lled vesicles can be observed in clusters in the vicinity of the active zone. Some vesicles are recruited to sites within the active zone in a process called docking. These vesicles subsequently are primed for release. The rise in cytosolic Ca 2 that occurs during an action potential triggers the opening of a fusion pore between some of the primed, docked vesicles and the plasma membrane. Transmitter exits through this fusion pore. Three pathways are proposed by which the now empty vesicle can be recovered and returned to the releasable pool: by a direct reclosing of the fusion pore and reformation of the vesicle, often called "kiss and run" by complete fusion followed by clathrin-mediated endocytosis, removal of the clathrin coat, and return of the vesicle to the releasable pool and by complete fusion and recycling as in the second pathway, but the endocytosed vesicle fuses fi rst with an endosome and mature vesicles are subsequently formed by budding from the endosome. After or during this recycling process, the vesicle must be refi lled with transmitter.vesicles, typically 50 nm in diameter, that cluster near the synapse and dock at specialized sites called active zones along the presynaptic membrane A comparison of these excitatory synapses at small neurons and the vertebrate neuromuscular junction at the much larger skeletal muscle fi ber illustrates two important points: the fundamental quantal nature of the chemical synapse is universal and the different physiological requirements of particular synapses, such as synapses onto small or large cells, can be met by differences in any of several parameters, including the number of receptors activated per quantum, the number of active zones connecting two cells, the probability of a given active zone releasing a vesicle, and the conductance of the postsynaptic receptor channel. In describing synaptic transmission, two parameters are particularly important. Quantal size or quantal amplitude describes the unitary response to release of a single quantum, whereas quantal content refers to the average number of quanta released by a single impulse. These parameters are discussed further later.The action potential is an electrical event-a change in the voltage gradient across the plasma membrane. How is this electrical change converted to the fusion of synaptic vesicles and the release of neurotransmitter The classic studies of Bernard Katz and colleagues It has been known for over 100 years that Ca 2 must be present in the extracellular saline for transmission to occur. Subsequently The opening of Ca 2 channels during a single action potential allows in enough Ca 2 to raise the concentration in the bouton from approximately 100 to 110 nM. How can a mere 10% change in the concentration cause a 1000-fold shift in the activity of the fusion machinery Furthermore, because Ca 2 pumps and exchangers on the plasma membrane work relatively slowly, this small rise in Ca 2 , which can be detected with fl uorescent Ca 2 indicator dyes, persists for hundreds of milliseconds after the action potential. Why then does transmitter secretion occur only for a millisecond or so The answer to both of these questions lies in the fact that the release mechanism is not responding to the general concentration of Ca 2 in the bouton, but rather to the concentration in a microdomain in the immediate vicinity of the Ca 2 channels In the brief period for which the Ca 2 channels are open, the cytosol that lies within 100 nm of the mouth of each channel is fl ooded with Ca 2 , and the local Ca 2 concentration is likely to reach 100 mM or higher the closer to the channel, the higher the concentration A single active zone may have more than 100 channels in its membrane and a single vesicle may therefore be within 50-nm of as many as 10 Ca 2 channels. Though not all these channels will open during each action potential, more than one channel is likely to open, and therefore Ca 2 entering through several nearby channels can sum in overlapping microdomains to infl uence a vesicle The sensor that detects the Ca 2 so as to trigger release must also have special properties to achieve fast and transient exocytosis. Estimates at several synapses suggest that the Ca  -sensor has an affi nity in the range of 10-100 mM, as appropriate for the relatively high concentrations of Ca 2 in the microdomains near channels. The on rate must be particularly fast. This is confi rmed by the fi nding that presynaptic injection of relatively slow Ca 2 chelators such as ethylene glycol bis-N,N-tetraacetic acid have almost no effect on transmitter release to single action potentials. Only fast Ca 2 chelators, such as 1,2-bisethane-N,N, N,N-tetraacetic acid, with on rates of about 5  10 8 M 1 s 1 , can capture Ca 2 ions before they bind to the secretory Importantly, the relationship of Ca 2 infl ux or cytosolic Ca 2 in microdomains to the amount of release is not linear at most synapses. By plotting this relationship on a log-log plot, a Hill coeffi cient can be determined, and values as high as 3 or 4 commonly are obtained. This value implies a high cooperativity in the action of Ca 2 inside the terminal, perhaps because multiple Ca 2 -binding sites must be occupied in order to trigger release effi ciently Chemical synapses permit one neuron to rapidly and effectively excite or inhibit the activity of another cell. A diversity of transmitters and receptors allows varied postsynaptic responses. The packaging of transmitter into vesicles and its release in quanta enable a single action potential to secrete hundreds of thousands of molecules of transmitter almost instantaneously onto another cell. Ca 2 acts as an intracellular messenger tying the electrical signal of presynaptic depolarization to neurosecretion. At fast synapses, Ca 2 enters through clusters of channels near docked synaptic vesicles in active zones. This Ca 2 acts at extremely short distances in remarkably little time and at very high local concentrations, in calcium microdomains, by binding cooperatively to a low-affi nity receptor with fast kinetics to trigger exocytosis. When Ca 2 channels close, these microdomains of high Ca 2 return to near resting concentrations quickly and the evoked response is terminated. Speed, effi ciency, and fl exibility are the hallmarks of this process.To release neurotransmitter in response to an action potential, a synaptic vesicle must fuse with the plasma membrane with great rapidity and fi delity, and thus the synapse requires an effective and well-regulated molecular machine. This machine must include the means to load the vesicle with transmitter, to dock the vesicle near the membrane so that it can fuse with a short latency, to defi ne a release site on the plasma membrane, and to cause the release itself. Additionally, a reserve of synaptic vesicles must be held near the active zone Active neurons are in constant need of transmitterfi lled vesicles ready to release their contents. A bouton In this adaptation of a model of Ca 2 dynamics in the terminal, a set of Ca 2 channels is spaced along the x axis, as if in a cross-section of a terminal. The channels have opened and, while they are open, the cytosolic Ca 2 concentration is spatially inhomogeneous. Near the mouth of the channel, the infl ux of Ca 2 drives the local concentration to as high as 800 M, but within just 50 nm of the channel, the concentration drops off to 100 M. Channels are spaced irregularly but are often suffi ciently close to one another that their clouds of Ca 2 can overlap and sum. In the active zone, an action potential has opened a fraction of the Ca 2 channels, and microdomains of high cytosolic Ca 2 in the CNS, for example, may contain a store of 200 vesicles, but if it releases even one of these with each action potential and if the cell is fi ring at an unexceptional rate such as 5 Hz, the store of vesicles would be consumed within less than a minute. Transport of newly synthesized vesicles from the cell body would be far too slow to support such a demand and the axonal traffi c needed to supply an entire arbor of nerve terminals would be staggering.In short, active neurons need an effi cient mechanism to recycle and reload vesicles within the terminal. The exception is peptidergic neurons because peptides must be synthesized in the endoplastic reticulum, chiefl y in the cell body. Not surprisingly, therefore, peptide vesicles are released at very low rates. For most neurotransmitters, however, the exocytosis of a synaptic vesicle is followed rapidly by endocytosis and within approximately 30 s the vesicle is again available for release. This pathway is sometimes referred to as the exo-endocytic cycle Histological tracers have provided a means to follow the vesicle cycle. One such tracer is the enzyme horseradish peroxidase, which could be placed in the extracellular solution and which would be internalized into intracellular compartments, including synaptic vesicles, when the synapse was stimulated. Another set of useful tracers are lipophilic dyes, including FM1-43, which partition into the surface membrane of the cell and are similarly internalized as membrane vesicles endocytosis. When the dye is washed from the extracellular space, the surface destains, but dye remains trapped in internal compartments. Loading of this dye upon stimulation and subsequent release of the dye with further stimulation has been an important method for examining the kinetics of the cycle.A defect in any single step in the exo-endocytic cycle will halt transmitter release. Moreover, each step in this cycle represents a potential control point for modulating the effi cacy of the synapse. For example, regulation by Ca 2 and other second messenger systems is known to affect the docking, fusing, and recycling of vesicles at some synapses and is also likely to regulate the balance between reserve stores and those vesicles actively engaged in the exo-endocytic cycle. Understanding the mechanisms of this modulation is an important goal and will certainly require the detailed understanding of the fundamental machinery itself.As discussed earlier in this chapter, the delay between the arrival of an action potential at a terminal and the secretion of the transmitter can be less than 200 ms. This places severe constraints on the fusion mechanism. Vesicles must already be present at the release sites, as there is no time to mobilize them from a distance. A catalytic cascade during fusion, such as that involved in phototransduction or in excitationcontraction coupling in smooth muscle, would also be far too slow for excitation-secretion coupling at the nerve terminal. Models therefore favor the idea that a fusion-ready complex of the vesicle and plasma membrane is preassembled at release sites and that Ca 2 binding need only trigger a simple conformation change in this complex to open a pathway for the transmitter to exit the vesicle.Because the volume of the synaptic vesicle is small, the diffusion of transmitter from the vesicle proceeds almost instantaneously as soon as a pore has opened up between the vesicle lumen and the extracellular space. This structure is referred to as the fusion pore, but its biochemical nature is unknown. Thus, the timecritical steps come between the infl ux of Ca 2 and the formation of the fusion pore, and these steps establish the latency between arrival of the action potential and transmitter diffusion into the cleft. Any further step, such as the complete merging of the vesicle and plasma membrane, can occur on a slower time course, after the transmitter has left the vesicle. The tethering of the vesicle at the release site and any biochemical events that need to occur in order for the vesicle to reach the fusion-ready state can also be slower. Docking and priming a vesicle cannot be too slow, however a central nervous system synapse is estimated to have 2 to 20 vesicles in this fusion-ready state therefore, if a synapse is to respond faithfully to a sustained train of action potentials, it must be able to replace the fusionready vesicles with a time course of seconds. The rate at which this occurs may determine some of the dynamic properties of the synapse.The short latency of transmission would seem to preclude the involvement of ATP hydrolysis at the fusion step because such a reaction would be too slow. Indeed, fusion can proceed without ATP present and thus, if energy is needed to fuse the membranes, it must be stored in the fusion-ready state of the vesiclemembrane complex and released upon addition of Ca 2 .Exocytosis and endocytosis are not unique to neurons these processes go on in every eukaryotic cell. Moreover, exocytosis itself is only one representative of a general class of membrane-traffi cking steps in which one membrane-bound compartment fuses with another. Other examples would include transport from the ER to the Golgi, or transport from endosomal compartments to lysosomes. In each case, the same biophysical problem must be overcome to bring the membranes close together and drive fusion.At present, it appears that all the membranetraffi cking steps within the cell use a similar set of proteins to accomplish this task Synaptic vesicles are abundant in nervous tissue and, due to their unique physical properties, they can be purifi ed to homogeneity by subcellular fractionation techniques. As a result, at a biochemical level, synaptic vesicles are among the most thoroughly characterized organelles. The protein compositions of synaptic vesicles from different sources are remarkably similar, demonstrating that many of the proteins present on the synaptic vesicle membrane perform general functions that are not restricted to a single class of transmitter.Our knowledge of many of the important proteins in vesicle fusion commenced with the characterization of purifi ed synaptic vesicles from which individual proteins could be isolated and subsequently cloned. The major constituents of the synaptic vesicle are shown in Transmitter release depends on more than just vesicular proteins, however proteins of the plasma membrane and cytoplasm are also important. In many cases, the identifi cation of these additional 166 8. RELEASE OF NEUROTRANSMITTERScomponents or an appreciation of their importance to the synapse derived from investigations of vesicular proteins. Two examples will serve to illustrate this point. The fi rst example begins with synaptotagmin, an integral membrane protein of the synaptic vesicle that was purifi ed from synaptic vesicles and cloned. The portion of synaptotagmin that extends into the cytoplasm A second and similar example Genetic screens have provided an independent method for identifying the machinery of transmitter release. One of the most fertile screens was carried out not in the nervous system, but in yeast. Because membrane traffi cking in yeast is closely parallel to vesicle fusion at the terminal, mutations that alter the secretion of enzymes from yeast can be a springboard for the identifi cation of synaptic proteins. In the early 1980s, a series of such screens was carried out, and a collection of over 50 mutants was obtained. Many of these were shown to accumulate in post-Golgi vesicles in the cytoplasm and thus appeared to block a late stage of transport, such as the targeting or fusion of these vesicles at the plasma membrane. Screens for suppressors and enhancers of these secretion mutations uncovered further components. Subsequently, excellent in vitro assays have been established in which to study the fusion of vesicles derived from yeast with their target organelles. Among the secretion mutants and their interacting genes were homologues of some of the proteins discussed earlier: sec4 encodes a small GTP-binding protein like rab3, and Sso1 and Sso2 encode plasma membrane proteins that are homologues of syntaxin. The sec1 gene encodes a soluble protein with a very high affi nity for Sso1, and the mammalian homologue of this protein, n-sec1, is bound tightly to syntaxin in nerve terminals and has an essential function in transmission. The convergence of neuronal biochemistry with yeast genetics has built a strong case for a common mechanism of vesicle fusion.Yeast is not the only organism in which a genetic screen uncovered an important protein for the synapse: the unc-13 mutation of Caenorhabditis elegans, e.g., identifi ed a component of the active zone membrane that is important in priming vesicles for fusion and in modulation of the synapse.Genetics has further contributed to our understanding of synaptic proteins by allowing tests of the significance of an identifi ed protein for synaptic transmission. Such studies have been carried out in C. elegans, Drosophila, and mice, and can reveal either an absolute requirement for the protein or relatively subtle effects.From biochemical purifi cations, in vitro assays, genetic screens, and fortuitous discoveries, a list of nerve terminal proteins has been assembled Three synaptic proteins, vesicle-associated membrane proteinsynaptobrevin, syntaxin, and the synaptosomal associated protein of 25 kDa , are capable of forming an exceptionally tight complex with one another that generally is referred to as either the core complex or the SNAP receptor A SNARE complex is found at each membrane-traffi cking step within a eukaryotic cell Abundant genetic and biochemical data argue for an essential role of SNAREs, and the combination of yeast genetics, in vitro assays, biochemical analyses, and synaptic physiology has had a synergistic effect in advancing the fi eld. For example, the discovery that secretory mutations in yeast were homologues of synaptic SNAREs provided some of the fi rst functional data on these proteins Some of the strongest evidence for an essential role of SNAREs at the synapse has come from the study of a potent set of eight neurotoxins produced by clostridial bacteria. These toxins have long been known to block the release of neurotransmitter from the terminal. The discovery that they do so by proteolytically cleaving individual members of the SNARE interaction of these three proteins is essential for synaptic transmission and is likely to lie very close to or indeed at the fi nal fusion step of exocytosis Each of the toxins comprises a heavy and a light chain that are linked by disulfi de bonds. The heavy chain binds the toxin to surface receptors on neurons, thereby enabling the toxin to be endocytosed. Once inside the cell, the disulfi de bond is reduced and the free light chain enters the cytoplasm of the cell. This light chain is the active portion of the toxin and is a member of the Zn 2 -dependent family of proteases. The catalytic nature of the toxin accounts for its astonishing potency a few tetanus toxin light chains at a synapse can suffi ce to proteolyse all the VAMPsynaptobrevin, thereby shutting down transmitter release. The toxins are highly specifi c, recognizing unique sequences within an individual SNARE protein, as summarized in One attractive model is that the energy released by the formation of this very high-affi nity complex is used to drive together the two membranes. A loose complex of the SNARES would form and then "zipper up" and pull the membranes together. This may correspond to the actual fusion of the membranes or, alternatively, to a priming step that requires a subsequent rearrangement of the lipids in order to open the pore that will connect the vesicle lumen to the extracellular space. Evidence from the fusion of yeast vacuolar vesicles implicates a distinct downstream step, regulated by Ca 2 calmodulin and involving subunits of the proton pump, but whether this is true of neurons as well remains unknown. Vesicles consisting of only lipid bilayers and SNAREs can fuse in vitro, suggesting that no other proteins will be essential for the fusion step.One additional function may reside with SNARE proteins: identifi cation of an appropriate target membrane. Within a cell, there are myriad membrane compartments with which a transport vesicle can fuse: how then is specifi city achieved The great diversity of SNAREs At some point as vesicles move through their exoendocytic cycle, energy must be added to the system. N-Ethylmaleimide sensitive factor, an ATPase involved in membrane traffi cking, is one likely source. NSF was fi rst identifi ed as a required cytosolic factor in an in vitro traffi cking assay As discussed earlier and outlined in Rab3, a small GTP-binding protein mentioned earlier, is another protein for which a priming or regulatory role often is invoked at the synapse. In yeast, and at other membrane-traffi cking steps within mammalian cells, rab proteins have essential roles. They appear to help a vesicle to recognize its appropriate target and begin the process of SNARE complex formation. At the synapse, however, the signifi cance of rab3 is still uncertain. Although it is clearly associated with synaptic vesicles, genetic disruption of rab3 has a surprisingly slight phenotype and causes only subtle alterations in synaptic properties. Whether this is due to additional, redundant rab proteins or whether the rab family has been relegated to a more minor role at the synapse remains to be determined.Because synaptic vesicles dock and fuse specifi cally at the active zone, this region of the nerve terminal membrane must have unique properties that promote docking and priming. The special nature of this domain is easily discernible in electron micrographs: an area of electron-dense material can be observed opposite the postsynaptic density Advances in electron microscopy have allowed a more detailed look at the association of vesicles and plasma membrane at the active zone In addition to the specializations of the active zone, additional machinery must be present to preserve a dense cluster of synaptic vesicles extending approximately 200 nm back from the active zone One protein family likely to play a role in the maintenance of the reserve pool is the synapsins, a set of peripheral membrane proteins on synaptic vesicles. Synapsins can also bind actin fi laments and thus may provide a linker that tethers the vesicles in the cluster to the synaptic cytoskeleton. Disruption of this link can cause the vesicle cluster to be diminished and reduce the number of vesicles in the releasable pool of the terminal. Synapsin has attracted considerable interest because it is the substrate for phosphorylation by both cAMP and Ca 2 -dependent protein kinases. These phosphorylations may infl uence the availability of reserve vesicles for recruitment to release sites.The most striking difference between synaptic transmission and traffi c between other cellular compartments is the rapid triggering of fusion by action potentials. As discussed previously, the opening of Ca 2 channels and the focal rise of intracellular Ca 2 activate the fusion machinery. How does the terminal sense the rise in Ca 2  What is the Ca 2 trigger and how does it open the fusion pore Is it a single Ca 2 -binding protein or do several components respond to the altered Ca 2 concentration Does Ca 2 remove a brake that normally prevents a docked, primed vesicle from fusing or does Ca 2 induce a conformational change that is actively required to promote fusion How does the steep, exponential relationship of release to intracellular Ca 2 arise These questions are an active area of investigation and debate.The leading candidate for being the synaptic Ca 2 sensor is synaptotagmin, an integral membrane protein of the synaptic vesicle Recently, an intriguing model has emerged in which the fusion of membranes is arrested at an intermediate state by the binding of a small protein called complexin to the assembled SNARE complex. Synaptotagmin, in the presence of Ca  , can bind to the SNARE complex and displace complexin, thereby allowing the fusion reaction to proceed. Evidence, both from in vitro studies of the biochemical interaction of complexin and synapatotagmin with the SNARE complex and from assays of membrane fusion suggests that complexin serves as a brake and that the primary function of synaptotagmin in exocytosis is to release that brake.To achieve the synchronous release of thousands of molecules of transmitter from the presynaptic nerve terminal, synaptic vesicles accumulate and store high concentrations of transmitter. In cholinergic neurons, for example, the concentration of acetylcholine within the synaptic vesicle can reach 0.6 M, more than 1000-fold greater than that in the cytoplasm. Two synaptic vesicle proteins mediate the uptake of transmitter: the vacuolar proton pump and a family of transmitter transporters. The vacuolar proton pump is a multisubunit ATPase that catalyzes the translocation of protons from the cytoplasm into the lumen of a variety of intracellular organelles, including synaptic vesicles. The resulting transmembrane electrochemical proton gradient is utilized as the energy source for the active uptake of transmitter by transmitter transporters.Transmitter uptake has been characterized in isolated synaptic vesicle preparations in which at least four types of distinct transporters have been identifi ed: one for acetylcholine, another for catecholamines and serotonin, a third for the excitatory amino acid glutamate, and the fourth for the inhibitory amino acids GABA and glycine. At least one gene for each of these classes of transmitter transporter has now been cloned. As expected, these distinct transporters are expressed differentially by neurons. The type of transporter in a cell dictates the type of transmitter stored in the synaptic vesicles of a particular neuron, and when investigators drive the expression of a glutamate transporter, e.g., in a GABA-releasing neuron, they can trick the cell into releasing glutamate.Vesicular transporters are integral membrane proteins with 12 membrane-spanning domains that display sequence similarity with bacterial drug-resistance transporters. Synaptic vesicle transporters are clearly distinct from the plasma membrane transmitter transporters that remove transmitter from the synaptic cleft and thereby contribute to the termination of synaptic signaling. The distinguishing characteristics include their transport topology, energy source, pharmacology, and structure. The sequestration of transmitter into vesicles, in addition to its obviously essential role for transmitter exocytosis, has some further benefi ts to the cell. Sequestration can prevent high cytosolic concentrations of the transmitter from inhibiting the biosynthetic enzymes for transmitter synthesis and can protect the transmitter from catabolic enzymes. In addition, in some cell types, sequestration may protect the cell from damage caused by the oxidation of labile transmitters, particularly dopamine.In contrast to small chemical transmitters, proteinaceous signaling molecules, including neuropeptides and hormones, typically are stored in granules that are larger and have a higher electron density than synaptic vesicles. The contents of these granules are not recycled at the release sites as a result, their replenishment requires new protein synthesis followed by packaging into secretory vesicles in the cell body. Because of the slow kinetics of their release, the slow responsiveness of their postsynaptic receptors, and their inability to be recycled locally, proteinaceous signaling molecules typically mediate regulatory functions.After exocytosis, the components of the synaptic vesicle membrane must be recovered from the presynaptic plasma membrane, as discussed previously. Vesicle recycling theoretically could be accomplished by either of two mechanisms The predominant pathway for synaptic vesicle recycling is more likely to be a second mechanism, endocytosis. Endocytosis of synaptic vesicle components, like receptor-mediated endocytosis in other cell types, is mediated by vesicles coated with the protein clathrin. Accessory proteins select the cargo incorporated into these vesicles as they assemble. The fi nal pinching off of clathrin-coated vesicle requires the protein dynamin, which can form a ring-like collar around the neck of an endocytosing vesicle. The importance of dynamin is demonstrated most clearly in Drosophila via a temperature-sensitive dynamin mutant known as shibire: at the nonpermissive temperature, shibire fl ies become paralyzed rapidly due to a nearly complete depletion of synaptic vesicles from their nerve terminals. Once the components of the synaptic vesicle membrane have been recovered in clathrin-coated vesicles, recycling is completed by vesicle uncoating and, perhaps, passage through an endosomal compartment in the nerve terminal The life of the synaptic vesicle involves much more than just the Ca 2 -dependent fusion of a vesicle with the plasma membrane. It is a cyclical progression that must include endocytosis, transmitter loading, docking, and priming steps as well. In many regards, this cell biological process shares mechanistic similarities with membrane traffi cking in other parts of the cell and with simpler organisms such as yeast. Interaction of vesicular and plasma membrane proteins of the SNARE complex-VAMPsynaptobrevin, syntaxin, and SNAP-25-is an essential late step in fusion. Many other proteins have been identifi ed that are likely to precede the action of the SNAREs, regulate the SNAREs, and recycle them. Components of the synaptic vesicle membrane, the presynaptic plasma membrane, and the cytoplasm all contribute to the regulation of synaptic vesicle function. Together, these proteins build on the fundamental core apparatus to create an astonishingly accurate, fast, and reliable means of delivering transmitter to the synaptic cleft.A quantitative description of the signal passing across a synapse can be a source of insight into the biophysics of transmission and its regulation. As discussed earlier, the response to an action potential in the presynaptic cell refl ects the release of discrete packets of transmitter, called quanta, that are a direct consequence of the vesicular release of transmitter. A given synapse, however, will not secrete exactly the same number of vesicles in response to each stimulus. Instead, the probabilistic nature of the presynaptic apparatus typically causes the amount released to fl uctuate from trial to trial in a quantal manner that is, the postsynaptic response adopts preferred levels, which arise from the summation of various numbers of vesicle fusions The quantal nature of transmission was fi rst demonstrated in the early 1950s by Bernard Katz and colleagues, who recorded from the frog neuromuscular junction. Spontaneous signals that were approximately 1100 of the signal evoked by stimulating the presynaptic axon were observed to occur at random intervals. These spontaneous minis were of roughly constant amplitude, with a coeffi cient of variation of 30%. As discussed previously, a neuromuscular junction normally releases hundreds of quanta per impulse, but when extracellular Ca 2 was lowered to reduce transmitter release to very low levels, the evoked response fl uctuated from trial to trial between preferred amplitudes, which coincided with integral multiples of the mini amplitude We now understand this to arise from the fact that minis are the fusion of a single vesicle and that evoked responses can represent one or more of these same vesicles. Before the vesicle hypothesis was established, however, Katz and colleagues inferred that the mini is the quantal building block, variable numbers of which are released to make up the evoked signal. The relative numbers of trials resulting in 0, 1, 2, . . . quanta were well described by a Poisson distribution-a statistical distribution that arises in many instances where a random process operates. On the basis of this evidence, Katz and colleagues proposed the following model of transmission, which has gained wide acceptance and will be referred to as the standard Katz model. Arrival of an action potential at the presynaptic terminal briefl y raises the probability of release of quanta of transmitter. Several quanta are available to be released, and every quantum gives roughly the same electrical signal in the postsynaptic cell. This is the quantal size or amplitude, Q, which sums linearly with all other quanta released. The average number of quanta released, m, is given by the product of n, the number of available quanta, and p, the average release probability: m  np. The average response to a stimulus is the product of the quantal size and the average number of quanta per stimulus, Qm or Qnp. The relative probability of observing 0, 1, 2, . . . , n quanta released is then given by a binomial distribution, with parameters n and p. The value of Q has a clear underlying basis: the effi cacy of an individual synaptic vesicle fusion in altering the conductance of the postsynaptic membrane. The binomial parameters, n and p, however, are formalisms whose underlying meanings are harder to pin down. n may correspond to the number of vesicles in a primed, fusion-ready state at the active zone or to discrete release sites competent for release, or even to the number of active zones. Correspondingly, p may represent the probability of fusion of any individual vesicle or the probability of fusion at a given release site or active zone. For some mechanisms, therefore, it is diffi cult to say whether n or p is altered. For example, if additional vesicles are recruited to release sites, that change may be manifest as a change in n because there are more releasable quanta or as a change in p because the probability of fusion at a given release site has increased because it is more likely to be charged with a vesicle.These quantal parameters remain a useful description of the synapse, however, despite their obscurity on a mechanistic level. For example, it is often useful to classify synapses as having a high or low probability of release to explain their behavior during trains of stimuli. In a synapse with few releasable vesicles and a high p, a train is predicted to deplete the releasable pool rapidly and the strength of transmission declines, a phenomenon known as synaptic depression. Another synapse might have the same average quantal content, but accomplish this with a large releasable pool and a low probability of fusion for any individual vesicle in the pool. Such a synapse would be less prone to depression and indeed both types of synapse are encountered.A major impetus for the accurate measurement of quantal parameters is that it may help determine the locus of modulatory effects on synaptic transmission, or the site of action of a drug. A blocker of postsynaptic receptors, for example, will not alter the mini frequency or the number of quanta released, but will decrease the amplitudes of both spontaneous minis and the quantal components of evoked responses. A change in the loading of transmitter into a vesicle could cause a similar change. In contrast, a synaptic modulator that decreased Ca 2 channel opening or a blocker of those channels would decrease the probability of presynaptic release and be recognized as a decrease in quantal content, m. Many modulators of presynaptic transmission cause a parallel change in quantal content and in the frequency of spontaneous minis. This sort of analysis has been instrumental in understanding synaptic plasticity and in determining whether a given alteration occurs at the presynaptic terminal or the postsynaptic membrane.Incorrectly applying the Katz model and quantal analysis to synapses at which its assumptions do not hold has been a frequent source of error. Although a superb description of transmission at the neuromuscular junction, it is not uniformly applicable to central nervous system synapses, and the technical diffi culties of isolating and accurately sampling the physiology of an individual synapse in the CNS can make the determination of quantal parameters exceptionally diffi cult.In particular, fi ve issues arise at CNS synapses with which the standard Katz model cannot deal adequately. These are nonuniformity of quanta, nonuniformity of release sites, postsynaptic membranes that distort responses, saturation of receptors, and silent synapses.For quantal analysis to work, individual quanta should be roughly equivalent in size, that is, with the same amount of transmitter in each vesicle and with similar populations of receptors facing their release sites, as is true at the frog neuromuscular junction. But in the CNS, both vesicle content and receptor populations may differ widely, particularly where more than one synapse connects two cells. The resulting nonuniformity of quanta means that mini amplitudes will not have a normal distribution and will not sum to tidy peaks like those shown in Postsynaptic membranes that distort responses introduce another problem: the voltage-dependent properties of the postsynaptic cell and the particular electrical properties of dendritic spines can prevent vesicles from summing in a simple linear fashion. Equally problematic is the saturation of receptors on the postsynaptic membranes of many CNS synapses. A glutamatergic CNS synapse may have fewer than 100 receptors present, and if a single quantum activates most of these, it is impossible for quanta to sum linearly. Indeed, a major difference between some vertebrate CNS synapses and the neuromuscular junction is that the quantal amplitude often is determined not by the vesicle contents, but by the number of available receptors. In the extreme case of a developing synapse, the variation from impulse to impulse might depend as much on whether one, two, or three receptors were activated per vesicle fusion as whether one, two, or three vesicles fused.Silent synapses represent an extreme form of the variability of postsynaptic responses and may be an important consideration for AMPA receptors at glutamatergic synapses. At these synapses, active zones may be secreting transmitter without producing a physiological response because no receptors are present in the postsynaptic membrane. These socalled silent synapses can spring to life when a set of receptors is inserted into the postsynaptic membrane in a concerted fashion. Because more active zones now are contributing to the detected physiological response, mini frequency will be higher and evoked release increased, although the quantal size will not have changed. Whereas the Katz model from the neuromuscular junction would consider these changes to be the hallmarks of a presynaptic change in release, the "unsilencing" of these CNS synapses is a postsynaptic event.Thus, many of the requirements for the standard Katz model cannot realistically be expected to hold in all cases and the evidence that these simple probabilistic models are correct is far from compelling. However, despite the technical diffi culties and theoretical caveats, the analysis of mini frequency, quantal size, quantal content, and synaptic probability has been the foundation of our description of synaptic transmission and the source of great insight into synaptic modulation.It has been possible to augment this understanding with independent methods, including the ability to monitor vesicle fusion optically from the unloading of the lipophilic dyes discussed earlier, and thereby to describe presynaptic activity without depending on the postsynaptic membrane to report the event. Another method of indirectly estimating release probability at glutamatergic synapses makes use of a blocker of NMDA receptors, MK-801, that will act only in the open state. From the rate of blockade during a train of stimuli, the probability of the channel having been opened by a given impulse can be inferred.Quantal analysis has improved our understanding of biophysical and pharmacological mechanisms of transmission by describing normal transmission and by offering a tool to distinguish and characterize presynaptic and postsynaptic actions of drugs or endogenous agents that modify the strength of a synapse.Although these methods must be applied with caution, they yield a unique insight into the mechanisms of synaptic plasticity. The nature of transmission at CNS synapses can be quite different from what is encountered at the classical synapse of the neuromuscular junction.Chemical synapses are not static transmitters of information. Their effectiveness waxes and wanes, depending on the frequency of stimulation and the history of prior activity. Because information processing in the nervous system in not conducted by individual action potentials at widely spaced intervals, this plasticity is of the utmost importance to the function of the synapse within its physiological circuit. At most synapses, repetitive high-frequency stimulation initially is dominated by a growth in successive PSP amplitudes, called synaptic facilitation Additional forms of use-dependent plasticity, called long-term potentiation and long-term depression, have received considerable attention as likely correlates of some forms of learning and are discussed elsewhere. Most frequently, at synapses in which a quantal analysis has been done, all these forms of synaptic plasticity are due to changes in the number of quanta released by action potentials.The propensity to facilitation or depression can be quite different at different types of synapse and thus contributes to the diversity of synaptic communication and the fl exibility of information processing by synapses. At a given synapse, the frequency and duration of a train can alter whether facilitation or depression is most in evidence. In a physiologically realistic setting of irregularly spaced stimuli, all these phenomena may be simultaneously at play and one or another may predominate for any given response, depending on the preceding history of stimulation. Thus, responses in the postsynaptic cell will be anything but a constant response to each action potential in the train.The rate at which synaptic depression develops usually depends on stimulation frequency. At many synapses, depression is relieved when transmission is reduced by lowering Ca 2 or raising Mg 2 in the medium-when little or no release occurs, there is little depression of the subsequent response. These characteristics are consistent with depression being due to the depletion of a readily releasable store of docked or nearly docked vesicles and recovery being due to their replenishment from a nearby supply As mentioned previously, synapses with a high probability of release from a relatively small pool of vesicles will be the most prone to this form of depression. Recovery from this form of depression appears to be infl uenced by cytosolic Ca 2 as well, consistent with a hypothetical ability of elevated Ca 2 in the cytosol to enhance the recruitment of reserve vesicles to release sites.Vesicle depletion cannot account for all forms of synaptic depression. At some synapses, depression is due to an inhibitory action of released transmitter on presynaptic receptors called autoreceptors. For example, in rat hippocampal cortex, the depression of GABA responses is blocked by antagonists of presynaptic GABAB receptors. Presumably, GABA acts to hyperpolarize nerve terminals and block transmitter release. At other synapses, desensitization of postsynaptic receptors contributes heavily to the observed depression.With few exceptions, all the phases of increased short-term plasticity are Ca 2 -dependent in the sense that little or no facilitation, augmentation, or potentiation is generated by stimulation in Ca 2 -free medium. Originally, these phases of increased transmission were thought to be due to the effect of residual Ca 2 remaining in active zones after presynaptic activity and summating with Ca 2 infl ux during subsequent action potentials to generate slightly higher peaks of Ca 2 Potentiation lasts for a long period after a strong tetanus because residual Ca 2 is present for the duration of PTP, presumably due to overloading of the processes responsible for removing excess Ca 2 from neurons. These processes include Ca 2 extrusion pumps, such as plasma membrane ATPase and Na  -Ca 2 exchange, and Ca 2 uptake into organelles such as endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria.Short-term synaptic plasticity allows synaptic strength to be modulated as a function of prior activity and can cause large changes in responses during physiologically relevant patterns of stimulation. Synapses may show a decline in transmission or an increase in synaptic effi cacy with time constants ranging from seconds to minutes to hours many synapses show a mixture of several of these phases. Synaptic depression may be due to depletion of a readily releasable supply of vesicles, to the inhibitory action of transmitter on presynaptic autoreceptors, or to the desensitization of postsynaptic receptors. Depression makes synapses selectively responsive to brief stimuli or to changes in level of activity. Frequency-dependent increases in synaptic effi cacy are due to the effects of residual presynaptic Ca 2 acting to modulate the release process, probably FIGURE 8.9 Depletion model of synaptic depression depicting the action of two stimuli that arrive so closely spaced that no vesicles have been recruited to the releasable pool to replace those that fused in response to the fi rst stimulus. A synapse in which the releasable pool is large and the probability of fusion for a given vesicle is low shows little or no depression. Because only a small fraction of the docked, releasable vesicles fused in response to the fi rst stimulus, the second response is comparable in amplitude. A synapse in which the releasable pool is small but the probability of fusion is high is likely to be strongly depressing. Vesicles released by the fi rst impulse deplete half the fusion-competent pool, leaving n at t 2 equal to half its value at t 1 . If p has not changed at t 2 , the second stimulus will release half as many quanta.Chemical synaptic transmission plays a fundamental role in neuron-to-neuron and neuron-to-muscle communication and is mediated by receptors embedded in the plasma membrane. These receptors can either mediate the direct opening of an ion channel or alter the concentration of intracellular metabolites. The sign of a given response can be inhibitory or excitatory, and the response magnitude is determined by receptor number, the "state" of the receptors, and the amount of transmitter released. Finally, the temporal and spatial summation of information conveyed by the activation of multiple receptors ultimately determines whether that neuron will fi re an action potential or the muscle will contract. As one can see, there is remarkable fl exibility and diversity in molding the response to neurotransmitter by constructing a synapse with the desired receptor types.Two broad classifi cations exist for receptors. An ionotropic receptor is a relatively large, multisubunit complex typically composed of four or fi ve individual proteins that combine to form an ion channel through the membrane In contrast, a metabotropic receptor is composed of a single polypeptide All ionotropic receptors are membrane-bound protein complexes that form an ion-permeable pore in the membrane. By comparing the amino acid sequence of cloned ionotropic receptors, one can deduce that they are similar in overall structure, although two independent ancestral genes have given rise to two distinct families. One family includes one of the receptors for acetylcholine, the nicotinic ACh receptor, a receptor for g-aminobutyric acid, the GABA A receptor, the glycine receptor, and one subclass of serotonin receptors, the 5HT3 receptor. The other family comprises the set of ionotropic glutamate receptors The nAChR is so named because the plant alkaloid nicotine can bind to the ACh-binding site and activateFundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition the receptor. The nAChR purifi ed as described from the electric organ of Torpedo ray is composed of fi ve subunits The primary structure of each nAChR subunit was obtained by the efforts of Shosaka Numa and colleagues. The deduced amino acid sequence from cloned mRNAs indicates that nAChR subunits range in size from 40 to 65 kDa. Each subunit consists of four transmembrane-spanning segments referred to as TM1-TM4 each subunit extends into the extracellular space, as does the loop connecting TM2 and TM3, as well as the C terminus. Amino acids linking TM1 and TM2 and those linking TM3 and TM4 form short loops that extend into the cytoplasm.In the model shown in Each receptor complex has two ACh-binding sites that reside in the extracellular domain and are formed for the most part by six amino acids in a subunits however, amino acids in both g and d subunits also contribute to binding. The two binding sites are not equivalent because of the asymmetry of the receptor due to the different neighboring subunits adjacent to the two a subunits. Signifi cant cooperativity also exists within the receptor molecule, and so binding of the fi rst molecule of ACh enhances binding of the second. When nAChR binds two molecules of ACh, the channel opens almost instantaneously, thus permitting the passage of ions. A model developed from electron micrographic reconstructions of the nicotine-bound form of the nAChR indicates that the closed-to-open transition is associated with a rotation of the TM2 segments The Muscle Form of the nAChR Is Very Similar to the nAChR from Torpedo nAChRs at the neuromuscular junction are a concentrated collection of homogeneous receptors having a structure similar to that of the Torpedo electric organ. This similarity is not surprising because the electric organ is a specialized form of muscle tissue. The adult form of the muscle receptor has the pentameric structure a 2 bed. An embryonic form of the receptor has an analogous structure, except that the e subunit is replaced by a unique g subunit. The embryonic and adult subunits of both mouse and bovine muscle receptors have been cloned and expressed and the receptors differ in both channel kinetics and channel conductance. These differences in channel properties appear to be necessary for the proper function of the nAChRs In the open confi guration, construction formed by the ring of leucine residues opens as the helices twist about their axes. Note that polar serine and threonine residues align when ACh binds, which apparently helps the water-solvated ions travel though the pore. Adapted from as they undergo the transition from developing to mature neuromuscular junction synapses.The pathway of nAChR assembly in muscle is a tightly regulated process. For example, the fi ve subunits of nAChR have the potential to assemble randomly into 208 different combinations. Nevertheless, in vertebrate muscle, only one of these confi gurations typically is found in mature tissue, indicating a very high degree of coordinated assembly and, ultimately, little structural variability. The well-ordered assembly takes place within the endoplasmic reticulum and during intracellular maturation, each subunit is glycosylated. Two highly conserved disulfi de bonds in the N-terminal extracellular domain are essential for effi cient assembly of the mature receptor. The fi rst is between two adjacent Cys residues and resides very close to the ACh-binding site on the receptor. The second bond is between two Cys residues 15 amino acids apart, forming a loop in the extracellular domain.Many ionotropic receptors, such as the nAChR, are phosphorylated, although the functional signifi cance of the phosphorylation is not always evident. The nAChR is phosphorylated by at least three protein kinases. cAMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylates the g and d subunits, Ca 2 phospholipiddependent protein kinase phosphorylates the d subunit, and an unidentifi ed tyrosine kinase phosphorylates the b, g, and d subunits. The phosphorylation sites are all found in the intracellular loop between TM3 and TM4 membrane-spanning segments. Phosphorylation by these three protein kinases increases the rate of desensitization of the receptor. Desensitization of receptors is a common observation, and this process limits the amount of ion fl ux through a receptor by producing transitions into a closed state in the continued presence of neurotransmitter. For the nAChR, the rate of desensitization has a time constant of approximately 50-100 ms.Neuronal nAChRs are similar, yet distinct in structure to the Torpedo isoform of the receptor. For example, the neuronal nAChR is composed of only two types of subunits, a and b, which combine to produce the functional receptor, and the majority of these receptors do not bind to a-bungarotoxin. At least nine different a subtypes have been identifi ed, and some are species-specifi c. Four different b subtypes have been identifi ed. The neuronal b subunits are distantly related to the muscle b1 subunit and sometimes are referred to simply as non-a subunits. All the a and b genes encode proteins with four transmembrane-spanning segments and, although the physical structure of this receptor family has not been well characterized, it appears that each functional receptor is a pentameric assembly.Neuronal nAChRs have diverse functions and are the receptors presumed to be responsible for the psychophysical effects of nicotine addiction. One major function of nAChRs in the brain is to modulate excitatory synaptic transmission through a presynaptic action. The diversity in function of nAChRs can be related to the heterogeneous structure contributed by the thousands of possible combinations between the different a and b subunits. Functional neuronal nAChRs can be assembled from a single subunit, and a single type of a subunit can also be assembled with multiple types of b subunits and vice versa. These additional possibilities produce a staggering array of potential receptor molecules, each with distinct properties, including differences in single-channel kinetics and rates of desensitization. It is also now established that subunit composition plays important roles in targeting the receptors to different intracellular locations.Neuronal nAChRs exhibit a range of single-channel conductances between 5 and 50 pS, depending on the tissue or the specifi c subunits expressed. All the neuronal nAChRs are cation-permeable channels that, in addition to permitting the infl ux of Na  and the effl ux of K  , permit an infl ux of Ca 2 . The Ca 2 permeability for neuronal nAChR is greater than that for the muscle nAChR and is variable among the different neuronal receptor subtypes. Indeed, some receptors have very high Ca 2 Na  permeability ratios for example, a7 nAChRs exhibit a Ca 2 Na  permeability ratio of nearly 20, whereas other neuronal isoforms exhibit Ca 2 Na  permeability ratios of about 1.0-1.5. The Ca 2 permeability of the a7 nAChR can be eliminated by the mutation of a single amino acid residue in TM2 without signifi cantly affecting other aspects of the receptor. This key Glu residue presumably lies within the pore of the receptor and enhances the passage of Ca 2 ions through an interaction with its negatively charged side chain. Activation of a7 receptors through the binding of ACh therefore could produce a signifi cant increase in the level of 186 9. NEUROTRANSMITTER RECEPTORS II. CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR NEUROSCIENCE intracellular Ca 2 without the opening of voltage-gated Ca 2 channels. Subunits a7, a8, and a9 are also the abungarotoxin-binding subtypes of neuronal nAChRs.For the nAChR from muscle, desensitization is minor and probably is not of physiological signifi cance in determining the shape of the synaptic response at the neuromuscular junction. However, for some neuronal nAChRs, desensitization likely plays a major role in determining the effects of the actions of ACh. Receptors composed of a7, a8, and certain ab combinations exhibit desensitization time constants of between 100 and 500 ms, whereas others exhibit desensitization constants between 2 and 20 s. Given the diverse functions of neuronal nAChRs, the variable rates of desensitization likely play important roles whereby this inherent property of the receptor shapes the physiological response generated from binding ACh.One Serotonin Receptor Subtype, 5-HT3, Is Ionotropic and Is a Close Relative of the nAChR 5-HT historically is thought of as a metabotropic transmitter that binds to and activates only GPCRs. The 5-HT3 subclass is an exception forming an ionotropic receptor activated by binding 5-HT. The 5-HT3 receptor is permeable to Na  and K  ions and is similar in many ways to nAChR in that both desensitize rapidly and are blocked by tubocurarine. From expression studies of the cloned cDNA, it appears that the 5-HT3 receptor is a homomeric complex composed of fi ve copies of the same subunit. The deduced amino acid sequence of the cDNA indicates that the protein is 487 amino acids long and has a structure most analogous to the a7 subtype of neuronal nAChRs, which also forms a homooligomeric receptor.The 5-HT3 receptor is mostly impermeable to divalent cations. For example, Ca 2 is largely excluded from permeation and in fact effectively blocks current fl ow through the pore, even though the predicted pore size of the channel is approximately the same as that for the nAChR. Apparently, other physical or electrochemical barriers limit the capacity of divalent ions to permeate the 5-HT3 pore. Dose-response studies indicate that at least two ligand-binding sites must be occupied for the channel to open however, the binding of agonist andor opening of the channel appears to be approximately 10 times slower than for most other ligand-gated ion channels. The functional signifi cance or physical explanation of this slow opening is not known. The native 5-HT3 receptor also exhibits desensitization, although the reported desensitization rate varies widely, depending on the methodology used for analysis and the source of receptor. Interestingly, this desensitization can be signifi cantly slowed or enhanced by single amino acid substitutions at a Leu residue in the TM2 segment of the subunit.5-HT3 receptors are distributed sparsely on primary sensory nerve endings in the periphery and are distributed widely at low concentrations in the mammalian CNS. The 5-HT3 receptor is clinically signifi cant because antagonists of 5-HT3 receptors have important applications as antiemetics, anxiolytics, and antipsychotics.Synaptic inhibition in the mammalian brain is mediated principally by GABA receptors. The most widespread ionotropic receptor activated by GABA is designated GABA A . The subunits composing the GABA A receptor have sequence homology with the nAChR subunit family, and the two families have presumably diverged from a common ancestral gene. The GABA A receptor is composed of multiple subunits, probably forming a heteropentameric complex of approximately 275 kDa. Five different types of subunits are associated with GABA A receptors and are designated a, b, g, d, and e. An additional subunit, r, is found predominantly in the retina, whereas the other subunits are distributed widely in the brain. Each subunit group also has different subtypes for example, six different a, four b, four g, and two r subunits have been identifi ed. The predicted amino acid sequences indicate that each of these subunits has a molecular mass ranging between 48 and 64 kDa. Like neuronal nAChR, these subunits mix in a heterogeneous fashion to produce a wide array of GABA A receptors with different pharmacological and electrophysiological properties. The predominant GABA A receptor in brain and spinal cord is a1, b2, and g2 with a likely stoichiometry of two a1s, two b2s, and one g2. Expression of subunit cDNAs in oocytes indicates that the a subunit is essential for producing a functional channel. The a subunit also appears to contain the high-affi nity binding site for GABA.The ion channel associated with the GABA A receptor is selective for anions, and the selectivity is provided by strategically placed positively charged amino acids near the ends of the ion channel. When GABA binds to and activates this receptor, Cl  fl ows into the cell, producing a hyperpolarization by moving the membrane potential away from the threshold for fi ring an action potential. The neuronal GABA A receptor exhibits multiple conductance levels, with the predominant conductance being 27-30 pS. Measurements and modeling of single-channel kinetics suggest that two sequential binding sites exist for anions within the pore.The GABA A receptor is an allosteric protein, its properties are modulated by the binding of a number of compounds. Two well-studied examples are barbiturates and benzodiazepines, both of which bind to the GABA A receptor and potentiate GABA binding. The net result is that in the presence of barbiturates, benzodiazepines, or both, the same concentration of GABA will cause increased inhibition. Benzodiazepine binding is conferred on the receptor by the g subunit, but the presence of a and b subunits is necessary for the qualitative and quantitative aspects of benzodiazepine binding. The benzodiazepine-binding site appears to lie along the interface between a and g subunits and only certain subtypes are sensitive to benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepine binding to GABA A receptors requires a, 2, or 5 and g2 or 3 other subunit combinations are insensitive to benzodiazepines.Picrotoxin, a potent convulsant compound, appears to bind within the channel pore of the GABA A receptor and prevent ion fl ow. Single-channel experiments indicate that picrotoxin either slowly blocks an open channel or prevents the GABA receptor from undergoing a transition into a long-duration open state. Apparently, barbiturates produce similar changes in channel properties, but they potentiate rather than inhibit GABA A receptor function. Bicuculline, another potent convulsant, appears to inhibit GABA A receptor channel activity by decreasing the binding of GABA to the receptor. Steroid metabolites of progesterone, corticosterone, and testosterone also appear to have potentiating effects on GABA currents that are similar in many ways to the action of barbiturates however, the binding sites for these steroids and the barbiturates are distinct. Finally, penicillin directly inhibits GABA receptor function, apparently by binding within the pore and thus is designated an open channel blocker.The physiological effects of compounds such as picrotoxin, bicuculline, and penicillin are striking. Each of these compounds at a suffi ciently high concentration can produce widespread and sustained seizure activity. Conversely, many, but not all, of the sedative properties associated with barbiturates and benzodiazepines can be attributed to their ability to augment inhibition in the brain through enhancing the inhibitory potency of GABA.Interestingly, r-subunit-containing GABA receptors, found in abundance in the retina, are pharmacologically unique. They are resistant to the inhibitory action of bicuculline, although they remain sensitive to blockage by picrotoxin. In addition, these retinal receptors are not sensitive to modulation by barbiturates or benzodiazepines. Thus, r-containing receptors are distinct from GABA A receptors and are similar to receptors earlier designated GABA C .Glycine receptors are the major inhibitory receptors in the spinal cord and the brain stem. Glycine receptors are similar to GABA A receptors in that both are ion channels selectively permeable to the anion Cl  . The structure of the glycine receptor is indicative of this similarity in properties. The native complex is approximately 250 kDa and is composed of two main subunits: a and b. The receptor appears to be pentameric, most likely composed of three a and two b subunits. The glycine receptor has an open channel conductance of approximately 35-50 pS, similar to that of the GABA A receptor. Strychnine is a potent antagonist of the glycine.Four distinct a subunits and one b subunit of the glycine receptor have been cloned. Each exhibits the typical predicted four transmembrane segments and are approximately 50% identical with one another at the amino acid level. Expression of a single a subunit in oocytes is suffi cient to produce functional glycine receptors, indicating that the a subunit is the poreforming unit of the native receptor. b subunits play exclusively modulatory roles, affecting, for example, sensitivity to the inhibitory actions of picrotoxin, and they are widespread in the brain. Because their distribution does not specifi cally colocalize with glycine receptor a subunit mRNA, b subunits may serve other functions independent of their association with glycine receptor.Purinergic chemical transmission is distributed throughout the body and is considered in greater detail in a later section on GPCRs. Purinergic receptors bind to ATP or its breakdown product adenosine. ATP is released from certain synaptic terminals in a quantal manner and often is packaged within synaptic vesicles containing another neurotransmitter, the best described being ACh and catecholamines.Two subtypes of ATP-binding purinergic receptors have been discovered to be ionotropic receptors, but data on their functions and properties are sparse. P2x receptors appear to mediate a fast depolarizing response in neurons and muscle cells to ATP by the direct opening of a nonselective cation channel. cDNAs encoding the P2x receptor indicate that its structure comprises only two transmembrane domains, with some homology in its pore forming region with K  channels. The P2z receptor is also a ligand-gated channel that permits permeation of either anions or cations and even molecules as large as 900 Da.Glutamate receptors are widespread in the nervous system where they are responsible for mediating the vast majority of excitatory synaptic transmission in the brain and spinal cord. In the 1970s, Jeffrey Watkins and colleagues advanced this fi eld signifi cantly by developing agonists that could pharmacologically distinguish between different glutamate receptor subtypes. Four of these agonists-N-methyl-D-aspartate, amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazoleproprionic acid, kainate, and quisqualate-are distinct in the type of receptors to which they bind and have been used extensively to characterize the glutamate receptor family In 1989, the isolation of a cDNA that produced a functional glutamate-activated channel when expressed in Xenopus oocytes was reported When cDNAs encoding these receptors were expressed in either oocytes or HeK-293 cells, application of the non-NMDA receptor agonist AMPA produced substantial inward currents. A striking observation from these expression studies was that when the GluR2 subunit alone was expressed in the oocytes, little current was obtained when the preparation was exposed to agonist, unlike the large currents found when either GluR1 or GluR3 was expressed Examination of IV plots indicates that when GluR1 and GluR3 are expressed alone or together, they produce channels with strong inward rectifi cation. Coexpression of GluR2 with either GluR1 or GluR3 produces a channel with little rectifi cation and a near linear IV plot. Further analyses indicated that GluR1 and GluR3, either independently or when coexpressed, exhibited channels permeable to Ca 2 Analysis of mRNAs encoding GluR subunits indicated that each could be expressed in one of two splice variants, termed fl ip and fl op. These fl ip and fl op modules are small segments just preceding the TM4 domain in all four GluR subunits. The receptor channel expressed from these splice variants has distinct properties, depending on which of the two modules is present. Specifi cally, fl op-containing receptors desensitize more during glutamate application. Therefore, GluRs with fl op modules express smaller steady-state currents than GluRs with fl ip modules. Both fl ip-and fl op-containing GluRs are widely expressed in the brain with a few exceptions. One unique cell type appears to be pyramidal CA3 cells in the rat hippocampus, where the GluRs are defi cient in fl op modules. In neighboring CA1 pyramidal cells and dentate granule cells, fl op-containing GluRs appear to dominate. The signifi cance of these splice variations for information processing in the brain is not known, but the physiological prediction would be that CA3 neurons exhibit larger steady-state glutamateactivated currents due to decreased desensitization from the absence of fl op modules. 9.5 Model of one of the subunits of the ionotropic glutamate receptor. Ionotropic glutamate receptors have four membrane-associated segments however, unlike nAChR, only three of them completely traverse the lipid bilayer. TM2 forms a loop and reexits into the cytoplasm. Thus, the large N-terminal region extends into the extracellular space, whereas the C terminus extends into the cytoplasm. Two domains in the extracellular segments associate with each other to form the binding site for transmitter, in this example kainate, a naturally occurring agonist of glutamate. Enlarged area of the predicted structure and amino acid sequence of the TM2 region of the glutamate receptor, GluR3. TM1 and TM3 are drawn as cylinders in the membrane fl anking TM2. The residue that determines Ca 2 permeability of the non-NMDA receptor is the glutamine residue highlighted in gray. In NMDA receptors, an asparagine residue at this same position is the proposed site of interaction with Mg 2 ions that produce the voltage-dependent channel block. Serine and phenylalanine, also shaded in gray, are highly conserved in the non-NMDA receptor family. The aspartate residue is also conserved and is thought to form part of the internal cation-binding site. The break in the loop between TM1 and TM2 indicates a domain that varies in length among ionotropic glutamate receptors. Adapted from Typically, one believes that there is absolute fi delity in the process of transcribing DNA into mRNA and then into protein that is, that nucleotides present in the DNA are accurate predictors of the ultimate amino acid sequence of the protein. However, a novel mechanism in the neuronal nucleus was discovered that edits mRNAs post transcriptionally, and at least three of the four GluR subunits are subjected to this process Although the fi eld of glutamate receptors is advancing at a rapid pace, we have limited structural data on the native molecule or on the topology of any single GluR subunit as it exists in the membrane. One exception is the recent report of the 3D structure of the native AMPA receptor determined by electron microscopy reconstructions The glutamate receptor has a large extracellular domain that serves as the binding site for kainite and glutamate Three other members, GluR5-7, now form a second non-NMDA receptor subfamily Two members of the glutamate receptor family, KA-1 and KA-2, are the high-affi nity kainate-binding receptors found in brain. Clearly distinct from the glutamate receptors discussed so far, KA-1 and KA-2 are more similar to the GluR5-7 subfamily than to the GluR1-4 subfamily as indicated by their evolutionary relatedness NMDA receptors appear to be at least partly responsible for aspects of development, learning and memory, and neuronal damage due to brain injury. The particular signifi cance of this receptor to neuronal function comes from two of its unique properties. First, the receptor exhibits associativity. For the channel to be open the receptor must bind glutamate and the membrane must be depolarized. This behavior is due to a Mg 2 -dependent block of the receptor at normal membrane resting potentials. Second, the receptor permits a signifi cant infl ux of Ca 2 , and increases in intracellular Ca 2 activate a variety of processes that alter the properties of the neuron. Excess Ca 2 is also toxic to neurons, and the hyperactivation of NMDA receptors is thought to contribute to a variety of neurodegenerative disorders.Many pharmacological compounds produce their effects through interactions with the NMDA receptor. For example, certain hallucinogenic compounds, such as phencyclidine and dizocilpine, are effective blockers of the ion channel associated with the NMDA receptor The primary structure of the NMDA receptor was revealed in 1990 when the fi rst cDNA encoding The location of these sites is a crude approximation for the purpose of discussion. Adapted from At least eight splice variants now have been identifi ed for the NMDAR1 subunit and these variants produce differences, ranging from subtle to signifi cant, in the properties of the expressed receptor Four other members of the NMDA receptor family have been cloned, and their deduced primary structures are highly related. These four NMDA receptor subunits do not form channels when expressed singly or in combination unless they are coexpressed with NMDAR1. Apparently, NMDAR1 serves an essential function for the formation of a functional pore by which activation of NMDA receptors permits the fl ow of ions. NMDA receptors 2A-2D play important roles in modulating the receptor activity when mixed as heteromeric forms with NMDAR1. Coexpression of NMDAR1 with any of the other subunits produces much larger currents than when NMDAR1 is expressed in isolation, and NMDA receptors expressed in neurons are likely to be heterooligomers of NMDAR1 and NMDAR2 subunits. The C-terminal domains of NMDAR2A-2D are quite large relative to the NMDAR1 C-terminus and appear to play roles in altering channel properties and in affecting the subcellular localization of the receptors. All the NMDAR subunits have an Asn residue at the critical point in the TM2 domain essential for producing Ca 2 permeability. This Asn residue also appears to form at least part of the binding site for Mg The distribution of NMDAR2 subunits generally is more restricted than the homogeneous distribution of NMDAR1, with the exception of NMDAR2A, which is expressed throughout the nervous system. NMDAR2C is restricted mostly to cerebellar granule cells, whereas 2B and 2D exhibit broader distributions. As noted, the large size of the C terminus of the NMDAR2 subunit suggests a potential role in association with other proteins, possibly to target or restrict specifi c NMDA receptor types to areas of the neuron. Mechanisms related to receptor targeting now are becoming understood and will clearly play major roles in determining the effi cacy of synaptic transmission.The biophysical properties of the NMDA receptor are complex. Single-channel conductance has a main level of 50 pS however, subconductances are evident, and different subunit combinations produce channels with distinct single-channel properties. A binding site for the Ca 2 -binding protein calmodulin also has been identifi ed on the NMDAR1 subunit. Binding of Ca 2 -calmodulin to NMDA receptors produces a four-fold decrease in open-channel probability. Ca 2 infl ux through the NMDA receptor could induce calmodulin binding and lead to an immediate short-term feedback inhibition, decreasing ion fl ow through the receptor.A general model for ionotropic receptors has emerged mainly from analyses of nAChR. Ionotropic receptors are large membrane-bound complexes generally composed of fi ve subunits. The subunits each have four transmembrane domains, and the amino acids in TM2 form the lining of the pore. Transmitter binding induces rapid conformational changes that are translated into an increase in the diameter of the pore, permitting ion infl ux. Cation or anion selectivity is obtained through the coordination of specifi c negatively or positively charged amino acids at strategic locations in the receptor pore. How well the details of structural information obtained for the nAChR will generalize to other ionotropic receptors awaits structural analyses of these other members. However, it is already clear that this model does not adequately describe the orientation of the transmembrane domains or the subunit number of the glutamate receptor family. The TM2 domain of glutamate receptors forms a hairpin instead of traversing the membrane completely, causing the remainder of the receptor to adopt a different architecture than that described for the nAChR family. It also appears that glutamate receptors are composed of four, not fi ve, subunits. These differences are perhaps not surprising given that the nAChR family and the glutamate receptor family appear to have arisen from two different ancestral genes.The number of members in the G-protein coupled receptor family is enormous, with over 1000 already identifi ed. Historically, the term metabotropic was used to describe the fact that intracellular metabolites are produced when these receptors bind ligand. However, there are now clearly documented cases where the activation of "metabotropic" receptors does not produce alterations in metabolites but instead produces their effects by interacting with G-proteins that alter the behavior of ion channels. Thus, these receptors are now referred to as G-protein-coupled receptors.When a GPCR is activated, it couples to a G-protein initiating the exchange of GDP for GTP, activating the G-protein A GPCR consists of a single polypeptide with a generally conserved structure. The receptor contains seven helical segments that wrap back and forth through the membrane The most conserved feature of GPCRs is the seven membrane-spanning segments however, other generalities can be made about their structure. The N terminus of the receptor extends into the extracellular space, whereas the C terminus resides within the cytoplasm The neurotransmitter-binding site for many GPCRs resides within a pocket formed in the center of the seven membrane-spanning segments acid, such as Ser, reduces binding by more than 10,000-fold. Two Ser residues in TM5 are also essential for effi cient transmitter binding and receptor activation, as is an Asp residue in TM2 and a Phe residue in TM6. In total, the two Asp, the two Ser, and the Phe residues are highly conserved in all receptors that bind catecholamines. Variations in the amino acids at these fi ve positions appear to provide the specifi city between binding of different transmitters to the individual GPCRs.The neurotransmitter-binding site of mAChRs, like that of the b2AR, has been investigated in great detail Proposed models for GPCR activation assume that the receptor can isomerize spontaneously between inactive and active states. Only the active state interacts with G-proteins in a productive fashion. This isomerization is analogous to the spontaneous isomerization proposed for ion channels as they oscillate between open and closed states. In the absence of agonist, the inactive state of GPCRs is favored, and little G-protein activation occurs. Agonist binding stabilizes the active conformation and shifts the equilibrium toward the active form, and G-protein activation ensues. This kinetic model indicates that agonist binding is not necessary for the receptor to undergo transition into the active state instead, it stabilizes the activated state of the receptor. This proposed model is supported by observations of both spontaneously arising and engineered mutants of bAR and aAR receptors. Specifi c amino acid replacements produced receptors that exhibit constitutive activity in the absence of agonists Extensive studies using site-directed mutagenesis and the production of chimeric molecules have revealed the domains and amino acids essential for G-protein coupling to GPCRs. Receptor domains within the second and third intracellular loops Residues associated with transmitting the conformational change induced by ligand binding to the activation of G-proteins have been investigated with the use of mAChRs. These studies revealed that an Asp residue in TM2 is important for the receptor activation of G-proteins, and altering the Asp by site-directed mutagenesis has a major negative effect on G-proteinreceptor activation. A Thr residue in TM5 As mentioned earlier, GPCRs are single polypeptides however, they are clearly separable into distinct functional domains. For example, b2AR can be physically split, with the use of molecular techniques, into two fragments: one fragment containing TM1-TM5 and the other containing TM6 and TM7. In isolation, neither of these fragments can produce a functional receptor however, when coexpressed in the same cell, functional b2ARs that can bind ligand and activate Gproteins are produced. This remarkable experiment indicates that physical contiguity in the primary sequence is not essential for producing functional b2ARs and also emphasizes the contribution of domains in the separate fragments to both ligand binding and G-protein coupling.The observation that GPCRs can be physically split through genetic engineering and produced functional channels when recombined provided the fi rst hint that full-length GPCRs might also oligomerize with each other into functional molecules. A test of this hypothesis was accomplished by making chimeric receptors composed of the transmembrane domains 1-5 of the a2-AR and the transmembrane domains 6 and 7 of the m3 muscarinic receptors and vice versa. When either of these chimeric molecules was expressed in isolation, neither formed a functional receptor. However, when coexpressed, receptors were formed that bind both muscarinic and adrenergic ligands and ligand binding led to functional activation of downstream effectors. Through domain swapping, the ligand-binding sites for both receptor ligands were reconstituted by oligomerization of the two chimeric receptors into one bifunctional chimeric dimer. Although some debate remains, evidence now seems overwhelming that oligomerization of GPCRs is adding a new layer of complexity and diversity to the study of these receptors. Important functional consequences could relate to alterations in ligand binding, effi ciency and specifi city of coupling to downstream effectors, subcellular localization, and receptor desensitization. The evolving and apparently widespread nature of direct receptor-receptor interactions leads one to believe that our current understanding of neurotransmitter receptors and their biological impact will be undergoing continual modifi cations for many years to come.The affi nity of a GPCR for agonist increases when the receptor is coupled to the G-protein. This positive feedback effectively increases the lifetime of the agonist-bound form of the receptor by decreasing the dissociation rate of the agonist. An excellent demonstration of this effect comes from studies using engineered bAR receptors that are constitutively active in their ability to couple to G-proteins. These mutant receptors show a signifi cantly increased affi nity for agonists. When the G-protein dissociates, the agonistbinding affi nity of the receptor returns to its original state. Changes induced by ligand binding apparently stabilize the receptor in a conformation with both higher affi nity for ligand and higher affi nity for coupling to G-proteins.GPCRs associate with G-proteins to transduce ligand binding into intracellular effects. This coupling step can lead to diverse responses, depending on the type of G-protein and the type of effector enzyme present. Ligand binding to a single subtype of GPCR can activate multiple G-protein-coupled pathways. For example, activated a2ARs have been shown to couple to as many as four different G-proteins in the same cell Activated GPCRs are free to couple to many Gprotein molecules, permitting a signifi cant amplifi cation of the initial transmitter-binding event. This catalytic mechanism is referred to as "collision coupling," whereby a transient association between the activated receptor and the G-protein is suffi cient to produce the exchange of GDP for GTP, activating the G-protein. For example, because adenylate cyclase appears to be tightly coupled to the G-protein, the ratelimiting step in the production of cAMP is the number of successful collisions between the receptor and the G-protein. A constant GTPase activity hydrolyzes GTP, bringing the G-protein and therefore the adenylate cyclase back to the basal state. The apparent maximal rate is achieved when all the G-proteincyclase complexes have become activated or, more accurately, when the rate of formation is maximal with respect to the rate of GTP hydrolysis. Additionally, the important process of receptor desensitization can also regulate the number of receptors capable of productive G-protein interactions.Desensitization is an important process whereby cells can decrease their sensitivity to a particular stimulus to prevent saturation of the system. Desensitization involves a complex series of events There are two known mechanisms for desensitization. One mechanism is a decrease in response brought about by the covalent modifi cations produced by receptor phosphorylation and is quite rapid. The other mechanism is the physical removal of receptors from the plasma membrane and tends to require greater periods of time. The latter process can be either reversible, sequestration, or irreversible, downregulation . Phosphorylation of ARs by PKA does not require that the agonist be bound to the receptor and appears to be a general mechanism FIGURE 9.8 Intracellular pathways associated with desensitization of GPCRs. GPCRs are phosphorylated on their intracellular domains by PKA, GRK, and other protein kinases. The phosphorylated form of the receptor can be removed from the cell surface by a process called sequestration with the help of the adapter protein b-arrestin thus fewer binding sites remain on the cell surface for transmitter interactions. In intracellular compartments, the receptor can be dephosphorylated and returned to the plasma membrane in its basal state. Alternatively, phosphorylated receptors can be degraded by targeting to a lysosomal organelle. Degradation requires replenishment of the receptor pool through new protein synthesis. Adapted from GRKs can also phosphorylate GPCRs and lead to receptor desensitization. Six members of the GRK family of kinases have been identifi ed: rhodopsin kinase, bARK, and GRK3 through GRK6 The cycle of homologous desensitization starts with the activation of a GPCR, which induces activation of G-proteins and dissociation of the bg subunit complex from a subunits. At least one role for the bg complex appears to be to bind to GRKs, which leads to their recruitment to the membrane in the area of the locally activated G-protein-receptor complex. The recruited GRK is then activated, leading to phosphorylation of the agonist-bound receptor and subsequent binding of arrestin. Arrestin binds to the same domains on the receptor necessary for coupling to G-proteins, thus terminating the actions of the activated receptor The ensuing process of sequestration follows GPCR phosphorylation and arrestin binding.Desensitization of GPCRs is also produced by removal of the receptor from the cell surface. This process can be either reversible or irreversible. Sequestration is the term used to describe the rapid but reversible endocytosis of receptors from the cell surface after agonist application Downregulation occurs more slowly than sequestration and is irreversible Like many proteins expressed on the cell surface, GPCRs are glycosylated, and the N-terminal extracellular domain is the site of carbohydrate attachment. Relatively little is known about the effect of glycosylation on the function of GPCRs. Glycosylation does not appear to be essential to the production of a functional ligand-binding pocket Another important structural feature of most GPCRs is the disulfi de bond formed between two Cys residues present on the extracellular loops There is now good evidence that metabotropic and ionotropic receptors can interact directly with each other The family of GPCRs exhibits structural similarities that permit the construction of "trees" describing the degree to which they are related evolutionarily Muscarine is a naturally occurring plant alkaloid that binds to muscarinic subtypes of the AChRs and activates them. mAChRs play a dominant role in mediating the actions of ACh in the brain, indirectly producing both excitation and inhibition through binding to a family of unique receptor subtypes. mAChRs are found both presynaptically and postsynaptically and, ultimately, their main neuronal effects appear to be mediated through alterations in the properties of ion channels. Presynaptic mAChRs take part in important feedback loops that regulate ACh release. ACh released from the presynaptic terminal can bind to mAChRs on the same nerve ending, thus activating enzymatic processes that modulate subsequent neurotransmitter release. This modulation is typically an inhibition however, activation of m5 AChR produces an enhancement in subsequent release. These autoreceptors are an important regulatory mechanism for the short-term modulation of neurotransmitter release.The family of mAChRs now includes fi ve members, ranging from 55 to 70 kDa, and each of the fi ve subtypes exhibits the typical architecture of seven transmembrane domains. Much of the diversity in this family of receptors resides in the third intracellular loop responsible for the specifi city of coupling to G-proteins. The m1, m3, and m5 mAChRs couple predominantly to G-proteins that activate the enzyme phospholipase C. m2 and m4 receptors couple to Gproteins that inhibit adenylate cyclase, as well as to G-proteins that regulate K  and Ca 2 channels directly. As is the case for other GPCRs, the domain near the N terminus of i3 is important for the specifi city of Gprotein coupling. This domain is conserved in m1, m3, and m5 AChRs, but is unique in m2 and m4. Several other important residues also have been identifi ed for G-protein coupling. A particular Asp residue near the N-terminus of the second intracellular loop is important for G-protein coupling, as are residues residing in the C-terminal region of the i3 loop.Major mAChRs found in the brain are m1, m3, and m4, and each is distributed diffusely. The m2 subtype is the heart isoform and is not highly expressed in other organs. Genes for m4 and m5 lack introns, whereas those encoding m1, m2, and m3 contain introns, although little is known concerning alternatively spliced products of these receptors. Atropine is the most widely utilized antagonist for mAChR and binds to most subtypes, as does N-methylscopolamine.The antagonist pirenzipine appears to be relatively specifi c for the m1 mAChR, and other antagonists, such as AF-DX116 and hexahydrosiladifenidol, appear to be more selective for m2 and m3 subtypes.The catecholamines epinephrine and norepinephrine produce their effects by binding to and activating adrenergic receptors. Interestingly, epinephrine and norepinephrine can both bind to the same adrenergic receptor. Adrenergic receptors are currently separated into three families: a1, a2, and b Only a few agonists or antagonists cleanly distinguish the AR subtypes. One of them, isoproterenol, is an agonist that appears to be highly specifi c for bARs. Propranolol is the best-known antagonist for b receptors, and phentolamine is a good antagonist for a receptors but binds weakly at b receptors. The genomic organization of the different AR subtypes is unusual. Like many G-protein-coupled GPCRs, b1 and b2ARs are encoded by genes lacking introns. b3ARs, which apparently have a role in lipolysis and are poorly characterized, are encoded by an intron-containing gene, as are aARs, providing an opportunity for alternative splicing as a means of introducing functional heterogeneity into the receptor.Some 80% of the DA in the brain is localized to the corpus striatum, which receives major input from the substantia nigra and takes part in coordinating motor movements. DA is also found diffusely throughout the cortex, where its specifi c functions remain largely undefi ned. However, many neuroleptic drugs appear to exert their effects by blocking DA binding, and imbalances in the dopaminergic system have long been associated with neuropsychiatric disorders.DA receptors are found both pre-and postsynaptically, and their structure is homologous to that of the receptors for other catecholamines D1-like receptors, like bARs, are transcribed from intronless genes. Conversely, all D2-like receptors contain introns, thus providing for possibilities of alternatively spliced products. Posttranslational modifi cations include glycosylation at one or more sites, disulfi de bonding of the two Cys residues in e2 and e3, and acylation of the Cys residue in the C-terminal tail. The DA-binding site includes two Ser residues in TM5 and an Asp residue in TM3, analogous to the bAR.Because of the presumed role of DA in neuropsychiatric disorders, enormous effort has been put into developing pharmacological tools for manipulating this system. DA receptors bind bromocriptine, lisuride, clozapine, melperone, fl uperlapine, and haloperidol. Because these drugs do not show great specifi city for receptor subtypes, their usefulness for dissecting effects specifi cally related to binding to one or another DA receptor subtype is limited. However, their role in the treatment of human neuropsychiatric disorders is enormous.Purinergic receptors bind to ATP or other nucleotide analogs and to its breakdown product adenosine. Although ATP is a common constituent found within synaptic vesicles, adenosine is not and is therefore not considered a "classic" neurotransmitter. However, the multitude of receptors that bind and are activated by adenosine indicates that this molecule has important modulatory effects on the nervous system. Situations of high metabolic activity that consume ATP and situations of insuffi cient ATP-regenerating capacity can lead to the accumulation of adenosine. Because adenosine is permeable to membranes and can diffuse into and out of cells, a feedback loop is established in which adenosine can serve as a local diffusible signal that communicates the metabolic status of the neuron to surrounding cells and vice versa The original nomenclature describing purinergic receptors defi ned adenosine as binding to P1 receptors and ATP as binding to P2 receptors. Families of both P1 and P2 receptors have since been described, and adenosine receptors are now identifi ed as A-type purinergic receptors, consisting of A1, A2a, A2b, and A3. ATP receptors are designated as P type and consist of P2x, P2y, P2z, P2t, and P2u. Recall that P2x and P2z subtypes are ionotropic receptors.A-type receptors exhibit the classic arrangement of seven transmembrane-spanning segments but are typically shorter than most GPCRs, ranging in size between 35 and 46 kDa. The ligand-binding site of Atype receptors is unique in that the ligand, adenosine, has no inherent charged moieties at physiological pH. A-type receptors appear to utilize His residues as their points of contact with adenosine, and, in particular, a His residue in TM7 is essential because its mutation eliminates agonist binding. Other His residues in TM6 and TM7 are conserved in all A-type receptors and may serve as other points of contact with agonists. A1 receptors are highly expressed in the brain, and their activation downregulates adenylate cyclase and increases phospholipase C activity. The A2a and A2b receptors are not as highly expressed in nervous tissue and are associated with the stimulation of adenylate cyclase and phospholipase C, respectively. The A3 subtype exhibits a unique pharmacological profi le in that binding of xanthine derivatives, which blocks the action of adenosine competitively, is absent. Very low levels of the A3 receptor are found in brain and peripheral nervous tissue. The A3 receptor appears to be coupled to the activation of phospholipase C.The P-type receptors, P2y, P2t, and P2u, are typical G-protein-linked GPCRs, mostly localized to the periphery. However, direct effects of ATP have been detected in neurons, and often the response is biphasic an early excitatory effect followed, with its breakdown to adenosine, by a secondary inhibitory effect. Interestingly, P-type receptors exhibit a higher degree of homology to peptide-binding receptors than they do to A-type purinergic receptors. As in A-type receptors, P-type receptors have a His residue in the third transmembrane domain however, other sites for ligand binding have not been specifi cally identifi ed.Cell bodies containing serotonin are found in the raphe nucleus in the brain stem and in nerve endings distributed diffusely throughout the brain. 5-HT has been implicated in sleep, modulation of circadian rhythms, eating, and arousal. 5-HT also has hormone-like effects when released in the bloodstream, regulating smooth muscle contraction and affecting platelet-aggregating and immune systems.5-HT receptors are classifi ed into four subtypes, 5-HT1 to 5-HT4, with a further subdivision of 5-HT1 subtypes. Recall that the 5-HT3 receptor is ionotropic. The other 5-HT receptors exhibit the typical seven transmembrane-spanning segments and all couple to G-proteins to exert their effects. For example, 5-HT1a, 1b, 1d, and 4 either activate or inhibit adenylate cyclase. 5-HT1c and 5-HT2 receptors preferentially stimulate activation of phospholipase C to produce increased intracellular levels of diacylglycerol and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate.5-HT receptors can also be grossly distributed into two groups on the basis of their gene structures. Both 5-HT1c and 5-HT2 are derived from genes that contain multiple introns. In contrast, similar to the bAR family, 5-HT1 is coded by a gene lacking introns. Interestingly, 5-HT1a is more closely related ancestrally to the bAR family than it is to other membranes of the 5-HT receptor family and originally was isolated by utilizing cDNA for the b2AR as a molecular probe. This observation helps explain some pharmacological data suggesting that both 5-HT1a and 5-HT1b can bind certain adrenergic antagonists. are similar in general structure in having seven transmembrane-spanning segments to other GPCRs however, they are divergent enough to be considered to have originated from a separate evolutionary-derived receptor family Currently, eight different mGluRs can be subdivided into three groups on the basis of sequence homologies and their capacity to couple to specifi c enzyme systems. Both mGluR1 and mGluR5 activate a G-protein coupled to phospholipase C. mGluR1 activation can also lead to the production of cAMP and of arachidonic acid by coupling to G-proteins that activate adenylate cyclase and phospholipase A 2 . mGluR5 seems more specifi c, activating predominantly the Gprotein-activated phospholipase C.The other six mGluR subtypes are distinct from one another in favoring either trans-1-aminocyclopentane-1,3-dicarboxylate or 1-2-amino-4-phosphonobutyrate as agonists for activation. mGluR2 and mGluR4 can be further distinguished pharmacologically by using the agonist 2-glycine, which is more potent at activating mGluR2 receptors. Less is known about the mechanisms by which these receptors produce intracellular responses however, one effect is to inhibit the production of cAMP by activating an inhibitory G-protein.mGluRs are widespread in the nervous system and are found both pre-and postsynaptically. Presynaptically, they serve as autoreceptors and appear to participate in the inhibition of neurotransmitter release. Their postsynaptic roles appear to be quite varied and depend on the specifi c G-protein to which they are coupled. mGluR1 activation has been implicated in long-term synaptic plasticity at many sites in the brain, including long-term potentiation in the hippocampus and long-term depression in the cerebellum.GABA B receptors are found throughout the nervous system, where they are sometimes colocalized with ionotropic GABA A receptors. GABA B receptors are present both pre-and postsynaptically. Presynaptically, they appear to mediate inhibition of neurotransmitter release through an autoreceptor-like mechanism by activating K  conductances and diminishing Ca 2 conductances. In addition, GABA B receptors may affect K  channels through a direct physical coupling to the K  channel, not mediated through a G-protein intermediate. Postsynaptically, GABA B receptor activation produces a characteristic slow hyperpolarization through the activation of a K  conductance. This effect appears to be through a pertussis toxin-sensitive Gprotein that inhibits adenylate cyclase.Cloning of the GABA B receptor revealed that it has high sequence homology to the family of glutamate GPCRs, but shows little similarity to other G-protein-coupled receptors. The large N-terminal extracellular domain of the GABA B receptor is the presumed site of GABA binding. With the exception of this large extracellular domain, the GABA B receptor structure is typical of the GPCR family, exhibiting seven transmembrane domains. The initial cloning of the GABA B receptor was made possible by the development of the high-affi nity, high-specifi city antagonist CGP64213. This antagonist is several orders of magnitude more potent at inhibiting GABA B receptor function than the more widely known antagonist saclofen. Baclofen, an analog of saclofen, remains the best agonist for activating GABA B receptors.Functional GABA B receptors appear to exist primarily as dimers in the membrane. Expression of the cloned GABA B R1 isoform does not produce signifi cant functional receptors. However, when coexpressed with the GABA B R2 isoform, receptors that are indistinguishable functionally and pharmacologically from those in brain were produced. In addition, GABA B dimers exist in neuronal membranes, and all data point to the conclusion that GABA B receptors dimerize and that the dimer is the functionally important form of the receptor. As noted earlier, GPCRs can interact with themselves and other receptors. It is well to keep in mind that these types of direct receptor interactions may be more widespread than currently appreciated.Neuropeptide receptors form an immense family. Because of their diversity, they cannot be covered in detail in this chapter. Despite this diversity, however, none of the receptors that bind peptides appears to be coupled directly to the opening of ion channels. Neuropeptide receptors exert their effects either through the typical pathway of activation of G-proteins or through a more recently described pathway related to activation of an associated tyrosine kinase activity.GPCRs are single polypeptides composed of seven transmembrane-spanning segments. In general, the binding site for neurotransmitter is located within the core of the circular structure formed by these segments. Transmitter binding produces conformational changes in the receptor that expose parts of the i3 region, among others, for binding to G-proteins. Gprotein binding increases the affi nity of the receptor for transmitter. Desensitization is common among GPCRs and leads to a decreased response of the receptor to neurotransmitter by several distinct mechanisms. mGluRs are structurally distinct from other GPCRs mGluRs have large N-terminal extracellular domains that form the binding site for glutamate. Otherwise, the basic structure of mGluRs appears to be similar to that of the rest of the GPCR family.Almost all aspects of neuronal function, from its maturation during development, to its growth and survival, cytoskeletal organization, gene expression, neurotransmission, and use-dependent modulation, are dependent on intracellular signaling initiated at the cell surface. The response of neurons and glia to neurotransmitters, growth factors, and other signaling molecules is determined by their complement of expressed receptors and pathways that transduce and transmit these signals to intracellular compartments and the enzymes, ion channels, and cytoskeletal proteins that ultimately mediate the effects of the neurotransmitters. Cellular responses are determined further by the concentration and localization of signal transduction components and are modifi ed by the prior history of neuronal activity. Several primary classes of signaling systems, operating at different time courses, provide great fl exibility for intercellular communication.One class comprises ligand gated ion channels, such as the nicotinic receptor considered in Chapter 9. This class of signaling system provides fast transmission that is activated and deactivated within 10 ms. It forms the underlying "hard wiring" of the nervous system that makes rapid multisynaptic computations possible. A second class consists of receptor tyrosine kinases, which typically respond to growth factors and to trophic factors and produce major changes in the growth, differentiation, or survival of neurons. A third and largest class utilizes G-protein-linked signals in a multistep process that slows the response from 100 to 300 ms to many minutes. The relatively slow speed is offset, however, by a richness in the diversity of its modulation and capacity for amplifi cation. The initial steps in this signaling system typically generate a second messenger inside the cell, and this second messenger then activates a number of proteins, including protein kinases that modify cellular processes. Signal transduction also modulates the level of transcription of genes, which determine the differentiated and functional state of cells.Signal transduction through G-protein-linked receptors requires three membrane-bound components:1. A cell surface receptor that determines to which signal the cell can respond 2. A G protein on the intracellular side of the membrane that is stimulated by the activated receptor 3. Either an effector enzyme that changes the level of a second messenger or an effector channel that changes ionic fl uxes in the cell in response to the activated G proteinThe human genome encodes for more than 800 receptors for catecholamines, odorants, neuropeptides, and light that couple to one or more of the 16 identifi ed G proteins. These, in turn, regulate one or more of more than two dozen different effector channels and enzymes. The key feature of this information fl ow is the ability of G proteins to detect the presence of activated receptors and to amplify the signal by altering the activity of appropriate effector enzymes and channels. A nervous system with information fl ow by fast transmission alone would be capable of stereotyped or refl ex responses. Modulation of this transmission and changes in other cellular functions by G-protein-linked systems and by receptor-tyrosine kinase-linked systems enables an orchestrated response. The large diversity of signaling molecules and their intracellular targets offer nearly unlimited fl exibility of response over a broad time scale and with high amplifi cation.G proteins are GTP-binding proteins that couple the activation of seven-helix receptors by neurotransmitters at the cell surface to changes in the activity of effector enzymes and effector channels. A common effector enzyme is adenylate cyclase, which synthesizes cyclic AMP-an intracellular surrogate, or second messenger, for the neurotransmitter, the fi rst messenger. Phospholipase C, another effector enzyme, generates diacylglycerol and inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate, the latter of which releases intracellular stores of Ca 2 . Information from an activated receptor fl ows to the second messengers that typically activate protein kinases, which modify a host of cellular functions. Ca 2 , cAMP, and DAG have in common the ability to activate protein kinases with broad substrate specifi cities. They phosphorylate key intracellular proteins, ion channels, enzymes, and transcription factors taking part in diverse cellular biological processes. The activities of protein kinases and phosphatases are in balance, constituting a highly regulated process, as revealed by the phosphorylation state of these targets of the signal transduction process.In addition to regulating protein kinases, second messengers such as cAMP, cyclic GMP, Ca 2 , and arachidonic acid can directly gate, or modulate, ion channels. G proteins can also couple directly to ion channels without the interception of second messengers or protein kinases. In these diverse ways, a neurotransmitter outside the cell can modulate essentially every aspect of cell physiology and encode the history of cell stimuli in the form of altered activity and expression of its cellular constituents. An overview of Gprotein signaling to protein kinases is presented in G proteins undergo a molecular switch between two interconvertible states that are used to "turn on" or "turn off" downstream signaling. G proteins taking part in signal transduction utilize a regulatory motif that is seen in other GTPases engaged in protein synthesis and in intracellular vesicular traffi c. G proteins are switched on by stimulated receptors, and they switch themselves off after a time delay. G proteins are inactive when GDP is bound and are active when GTP is bound. The sole function of seven-helix receptors in activating G proteins is to catalyze an exchange of GTP for GDP. This is a temporary switch because G proteins are designed with a GTPase activity that hydrolyzes the bound GTP and converts the G protein back into the GDP-bound, or inactive, state. Thus, a G protein must continuously sample the state of activation of the receptor, and it transmits downstream information only while the neuron is exposed to neurotransmitter. The GTPase activity of G proteins thus serves both as a regulatable timer and as an amplifi er G proteins are trimeric structures composed of two functional units: an a subunit that catalyzes GTPase activity and Receptor . NT FIGURE 10.2 GTPase activity of G proteins serves as a timer and amplifi er. Receptors activated by neurotransmitters initiate the GTPase timing mechanism of G proteins by displacement of GDP by GTP. Neurotransmitters thus convert G-GDP to GGTP. that interacts tightly with the a subunit when bound to GDP One of the more tense and public debates in signal transduction has been the question whether the a subunit alone conveys information that specifi es which effector is activated or whether the bg pair can also interact with effectors. One of the contestants even paid for a vanity license plate proclaiming "a not bg." This notion was eventually changed because of the fi nding that bg can directly activate certain K  channels. It is now apparent that a and bg subunits can both modify effector enzymes, but the historic association of G-protein function with a has persisted for the purpose of nomenclature, with G s and a s referring to the G protein and its corresponding a subunit, which stimulates adenylate cyclase. The a subunits may act either independently or in concert with bg The function of the trimeric G proteins is to decode information about the concentration of neurotransmitters bound to appropriate receptors on the cell surface and convert this information into a change in the activity of enzymes and channels that mediate the effects of the neurotransmitter. The known effector functions of a include both stimulation and inhibition of adenylate cyclases that is sensitive to cholera toxin and pertussis toxin, respectively. In addition, it modulates activation of cGMP phosphodiesterase, PLC, and regulation of Na  K  exchange, PI3K, RhoGEF, and rasGAP. The effector functions of bg dimers include inhibition of many adenylate cyclase and stimulation of adenylate cyclase types II and IV. In addition, they regulate stimulation of phospholipase Cb, K  , and Ca 2 channels, phospholipase A 2 , phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase, PKD, and dynamin in vesicle budding.Signals originating from activated receptors can either converge or diverge, depending on the receptor and on the complement of G proteins and effectors in a given neuron Furthermore, the intrinsic GTPase activity can be modulated by GTPase-activating proteins,Active state FIGURE 10.3 Interconversion, catalyzed by excited receptors, of G-protein subunits between inactive and active states. Displacement of GDP with GTP dissociates the inactive heterotrimeric G protein, generating a-GTP and bg, both of which can interact with their respective effectors and activate them. The system converts into the inactive state after GTP has been hydrolyzed and the subunits have reassociated. From The level of cAMP is highly regulated due to a balance between synthesis by adenylate cyclases and degradation by cAMP phosphodiesterases. Each of these enzymes can be regulated and manipulated independently. Adenylate cyclase was the fi rst G-protein effector to be identifi ed, and now a group of related adenylate cyclases are known to be regulated differentially by both a and bg subunits Adenylate cyclases are large proteins of approximately 120 kDa. All the known classes of adenylate cyclase consist of a tandem repeat of the same structural motif-a short cytoplasmic region followed by six putative transmembrane segments and then a FIGURE 10.4 G proteins are held in an inactive state because of very high affi nity binding of GDP to their a subunits. When activated by agonist, membrane-bound seven helical receptors interact with heterotrimeric G proteins and stimulate dissociation of GDP. This permits GTP to bind to and activate a, which then dissociates from the high-affi nity dimer of b and g subunits. Both activated a and bg are capable of interacting with downstream effectors. This fi gure shows the interaction of GTP-a s with adenylate cyclase. Adenylate cyclase then catalyzes the synthesis of the second messenger cyclic AMP from ATP. Signaling is terminated when a hydrolyzes its bound GTP to GDP. In some signaling systems, GTP hydrolysis is stimulated by GTPase-activating proteins or GAPs that bind to a and stabilize the transition state for GTP hydrolysis. Hydrolysis of GTP permits GDP-a to dissociate from its effector and associate again with bg. The heterotrimeric G protein is then ready for another signaling cycle if an activated receptor is present. This fi gure is based on the original work of Mark Wall and John Tesmer.highly conserved catalytic domain of approximately 35 kDa on the cytoplasmic side that bind ATP and catalyze its conversion into cAMP. Some isoforms are activated by calmodulin.All adenylate cyclase isoforms are stimulated by G s through its a s subunit. Known isoforms can be divided minimally into at least three groups on the basis of additional regulatory properties Adenylate cyclases are also subject to several forms of inhibitory control. First, activation of all adenylate cyclases can be antagonized by bg released from abundant G proteins, such as G i , G o , and G z , which complex with a s -GTP and shift the equilibrium toward an inactive trimer by mass action. Second, either a or bg subunits derived from G i , G o , or G z can directly inhibit group A cyclases, and the a subunit from G i or G z can inhibit group C cyclases. The level of G s in particular is low thus,  s derived from G s is suffi cient to activate adenylate cyclases, but the bg derived from it is insuffi cient to directly inhibit or activate adenylate cyclases. This explains the apparent paradox that receptors that couple to G s produce effects only through  s , whereas receptors that couple to G i produce effects through both a i and bg even though they can share the same bg.Receptors Coupling to Adenylate Cyclase Dozens of neurotransmitters and neuropeptides work through cAMP as a second messenger and by G-protein-linked activation or inhibition of adenylate cyclase. Among the neurotransmitters that increase cAMP are the amines norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, and histamine, and the neuropeptides vasointestinal peptide and somatostatin. In the olfactory system, a special form of G-protein a subunit, termed a olf , serves the same function as a s and couples several hundred seven-helix receptors to type III adenylate cyclase in the neuroepithelium.Type I and type II adenylate cyclases can integrate concurrent stimulation of neurons by two or more neurotransmitters FIGURE 10.5 Signals can converge or diverge on the basis of interactions between receptors and G proteins and between G proteins and effectors. The complement of receptors, G proteins, and effectors in a given neuron determines the degree of integration of signals, as well as whether cell stimulation will produce a focused response to a neurotransmitter or a coordination of divergent responses. Adapted from conditional on the presence of bg derived from an abundant G protein, thus enabling the cyclase to serve as a coincidence detector. Thus, activation of a second receptor, presumably coupled to the abundant G i and G o , is needed to provide the bg.Two phospholipids, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and phosphatidylcholine, are primary precursors for a G-protein-based second-messenger system. Three second messengers, diacylglycerol, arachidonic acid and its metabolites, and elevated Ca 2 , ultimately are produced. A single step converts inert phospholipid precursors into lipid messengers. DAG action is mediated by protein kinase C  is coupled to the activation of a phosphatidylinositide-specifi c PLC.Phosphatidylinositol is composed of a diacylglycerol backbone with myoinositol attached to the sn-3 hydroxyl by a phosphodiester bond PLCb is coupled to neurotransmitters by G i and G q. A pertussis toxin-sensitive pathway is mediated by a number of isoforms referred to as G q and mediated by their a q . G i is coupled to PLCb via its bg rather than a subunit in a pathway that is insensitive to pertussis toxin. Receptor tyrosine kinases can regulate PLCg by a G-protein-independent pathway involving their recruitment to the receptor and activation via phosphorylation.DAG Derived from Activation of Phospholipase D A slower but larger increase in DAG can be generated by activation phospholipase D, which cleaves phosphatidylcholine to produce phosphatidic acid and choline. Dephosphorylation of phosphatidic acid produces DAG. The PLD pathway may be used by some mitogens and growth factors and likely contains a variety of activation schemes that may include G proteins.Additional Lipid Messengers DAG is itself a source of another lipid messenger, by the action of phospholipase A 2, which releases the fatty acid, typically arachidonic acid, from the sn-2 position of the DAG backbone A subfamily of lipid kinases that are specifi c for addition of a phosphate moiety on the 3 position, phosphoinositide 3-kinases, also play a regulatory role. Depending on their preferred lipidTypically unsaturated FA 4 5 P P substrate, they can produce PI-3-P, PI-3,4-P 2 , PI-3,5-P 2 , and PI-3,4,5-P 3 . A number of signals, including growth factors, activate PI-3 kinases to generate these lipid messengers. In turn, these lipids then bind directly to a number of proteins and enzymes to modify vesicular traffi c, protein kinases involved in survival and cell death. There is also evidence that another lipid, sphingomyelin, is a precursor for intracellular signals as well. The IP 3 receptor is a macromolecular complex that functions as an IP 3 sensor and a Ca 2 release channel. It has a broad tissue distribution but is highly concentrated in the cerebellum. The IP 3 receptor is a tetramer of 313-kDa subunits with a single IP 3 -binding site at its N-terminal of each subunit, facing the cytoplasm. Ca 2 release by IP 3 is highly cooperative so that a small change in IP 3 has a large effect on Ca 2 release from the ER. The mouse mutants pcd and nervous have defi cient levels of the IP 3 receptor and exhibit defective Ca 2 signaling, and a genetic knockout of the IP 3 receptor leads to motor and other defi cits.Termination of the IP 3 Signal IP 3 is a transient signal terminated by dephosphorylation to inositol. Inactivation is initiated either by dephosphorylation to inositol 1,4-bisphosphate Calcium has a dual role as a carrier of electrical current and as a second messenger. Its effects are more diverse than those of other second messengers such as cAMP and DAG because its actions are mediated by a much larger array of proteins, including protein kinases Ca 2 acts as a second messenger to modulate the activity of many mediators. The predominant mediator of Ca 2 action is calmodulin, a ubiquitous 17-kDa calcium-binding protein. Ca 2 binds to calmodulin in the physiological range and converts it into an activator of many cellular targets Oxide An important target of Ca 2 -calmodulin is the enzyme nitric oxide synthase. This enzyme synthesizes one of the simplest known messengers, the gas NO Let us now turn to the details of the NO pathway. Nitric oxide is derived from L-arginine in a reaction catalyzed by NOS, a complex enzyme that converts Larginine and O 2 into NO and L-citrulline. NOS likely produces the neutral free radical NO as the active agent. NO lasts only a few seconds in biological fl uids and thus, no specialized processes are needed to inactivate this particular signaling molecule. As a gas, NO is soluble in both aqueous and lipid media and can diffuse readily from its site of synthesis across the cytosol or cell membrane and affect targets in the same cell or in nearby neurons, glia, and vasculature Two types of guanylate cyclase, a soluble one regulated by NO and a membrane-bound enzyme regulated directly by neuropeptides, synthesize cGMP from GTP in a reaction similar to the synthesis of cAMP from ATP. NO activates the soluble enzyme by binding to the iron atom of the heme moiety. This is the basic mechanism for the regulation of soluble guanylate cyclases. A number of therapeutic muscle relaxants, such as nitroglycerin and nitroprusside, are NO donors that produce their effects by stimulating cGMP synthesis. Membranebound guanylate cyclases are transmembrane proteins with a binding site for neuroendocrine peptides on the extracellular side of the plasma membrane and a catalytic domain on the cytosolic side.The versatility of G-protein signaling is illustrated in vertebrate phototransduction, in which a specialized G protein called transducin is activated by light rather than by a hormone or neurotransmitter. Transducin stimulates cGMP phosphodiesterase, an effector enzyme that hydrolyzes cGMP and ultimately turns off the dark current. Nature has evolved an elegant mechanism for using photons of light to modify a hormone-like molecule, retinal, that activates a seven-helix receptor called rhodopsin. Activated rhodopsin dissociates a t from transducin, which then activates a soluble cGMP phosphodiesterase.Rods can detect a single photon of light because the signal-to-noise ratio of the system is very low and the amplifi cation factor in phototransductin is quite high one rhodopsin molecule stimulated by a single photon can activate 500 transducins. Transducin remains in the "on" state long enough to activate 500 PDEs. PDE can hydrolyze about 100 cGMP molecules in the second before it is deactivated. cGMP in rods regulates a cGMP-gated cation channel, leading to additional amplifi cation of the signal.Each type of neuron has a repertoire of ion channels that give it a distinct response signature, and it is not surprising that several types of mechanisms regulate these channels. Channel modulation occurs via G proteins, second messengers and their cognate protein kinases that phosphorylate ion channels as well as by direct effects of G proteins.The fi rst ion channel demonstrated to undergo regulation by G proteins was the cardiac K  channel that mediates slowing of the heart by acetylcholine released from the vagus nerve. When this I kach channel is examined in a membrane patch delimited by the seal of a cell-attached electrode, the addition of acetylcholine within the electrode increases the frequency of channel opening dramatically, whereas the addition of acetylcholine to the cell surface outside the seal does not. The process is therefore described as membrane delimited, with a direct interaction between the G protein and the channel.There is also compelling evidence for the stimulation or inhibition of Ca 2 channel subtypes by G proteins. The central role played by Ca 2 in muscle contraction, in synaptic release, and in gene expression makes Ca 2 infl ux a common target for regulation by neurotransmitters. In the heart, where L-type Ca 2 channels are critical for the regulation of contractile strength, the Ca 2 current is enhanced by  s formed by b-adrenergic stimulation of G s . In contrast, N-type Ca 2 channels, which modulate synaptic release in nerve terminals, often are inhibited by muscarinic and aadrenergic agents and by opiates acting at receptors coupled to G i and G o .The G-protein-based signaling system provides several advantages over fast transmission A major class of signaling utilizing G-protein-linked signals affords the nervous system a rich diversity of SIGNALING THROUGH G-PROTEIN-LINKED RECEPTORS modulation, amplifi cation, and plasticity. Signals are mediated through second messengers activating proteins that modify cellular processes and gene transcription. A key feature is the ability of G proteins to detect the presence of activated receptors and to amplify the signal through effector enzymes and channels. Phosphorylation of key intracellular proteins, ion channels, and enzymes activates diverse, highly regulated cellular processes. The specifi city of response is ensured through receptors reacting only with a limited number of G proteins. Coupling between receptor, G protein, and its effector, and spatial compartmentalization of the system enables specifi city and localized control of signaling. Phospholipids and phosphoinositols provide substrates for second-messenger signaling for G proteins. Stimulation of release of intracellular calcium is often the mediator of the signal. Calcium itself has a dual role as a carrier of electrical current and as a second messenger. Calmodulin is a key regulator that provides complexity and enhances specifi city of the signaling system. Sensitivity of the system is imparted by an extremely robust amplifi cation system, as seen in the visual system, which can detect single photons of light.Protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are key processes that regulate cellular function. They play a fundamental role in mediating signal transduction initiated by neurotransmitters, neuropeptides, growth factors, hormones, and other signaling molecules Protein kinases catalyze the transfer of the terminal, or g, phosphate of ATP to the hydroxyl moieties of Ser, Thr, or Tyr residues at specifi c sites on target proteins. Most protein kinases are either SerThr kinases or Tyr kinases, with only a few designed to phosphorylate both categories of acceptor amino acids. Protein phosphatases catalyze the hydrolysis of the phosphoryl groups from phosphoserine, phosphothreonine, phosphotyrosine, or both types of phosphorylated amino acids on phosphoproteins.The activity of protein kinases and protein phosphatases often is regulated either by a second messenger or by an extracellular ligand. In general, second-messengerregulated kinases modify Ser and Thr, whereas receptor-linked kinases modify Tyr. Among the many protein kinases and protein phosphatases in neurons, a relatively small number serve as master regulators to orchestrate neuronal function. The cAMP-dependent protein kinase is a prototype for the known regulated SerThr kinases they are similar in overall structure and regulatory design. PKA is the predominant mediator for signaling through cAMP, the only others being a cAMP-liganded ion channel in olfaction and exchange protein directly activate by cAMP which modulate GDP-GTP exchange in cell adhesion and exocytosis. In a similar fashion, the related cGMPdependent protein kinase mediates most of the actions of cGMP. Ca 2 -calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II and several other kinases mediate many of the actions of stimuli that elevate intracellular Ca 2 . Finally, the PI signaling system increases both DAG and Ca 2 , which activate any of a family of protein kinases collectively called protein kinase C.The activities of these second messenger-regulated protein kinases are countered by a relatively small number of phosphatases, exemplifi ed by protein phosphatase 1, protein phosphatase 2A, and protein phosphatase 2B. Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are reversible processes, and the net activity of the two processes Protein kinases and protein phosphatases are described either as multifunctional if they have a broad specifi city and therefore modify many protein targets, or as dedicated if they have a very narrow substrate specifi city. Spatial positioning of kinases and their substrates in the cell either increases or decreases the likelihood of phosphorylation-dephosphorylation of a given substrate.The amplifi cation of signal transduction described earlier is continued during transmission of the signal by protein kinases and protein phosphatases. In some cases, the kinases are themselves subject to activation by phosphorylation in a cascade in which one activated kinase phosphorylates and activates a second, and so on, to provide amplifi cation and a switch-like response termed ultrasensitivity.Kinases and phosphatases integrate cellular stimuli and encode the stimuli as the steady-state level of phosphorylation of a large complement of proteins in the cell Phosphorylation produces specifi c changes in the function of a target protein, such as increasing or decreasing the catalytic activity of an enzyme, conductance of an ion channel, or desensitization of a receptor. Kinases and phosphatases modulate proteins by regulating the presence of a highly charged and bulky phosphoryl moiety on Ser, Thr, or Tyr at a precise location on the substrate protein. The phosphate may elicit a conformational change or alter interaction with other proteins.Finally, each of the three kinases described here is capable of functioning as a cognitive kinase-that is, a kinase capable of a molecular memory. Although each is activated by its respective second messenger, it can undergo additional modifi cation that reduces its requirement for the second messenger. This molecular memory potentiates the activity of these kinases and may enable them to participate in aspects of neuronal plasticity., postsynaptic sensitivity, and membrane conductance. Paul Greengard and Eric Kandel received the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 2000 for their discoveries concerning signal transduction via PKA and phosphoprotein phosphatases in the nervous system. PKA is a tetrameric protein composed of two types of subunits: a dimer of regulatory subunits and two catalytic subunits. Two or more isoforms of the RI, RII, and C subunits have distinct tissue and developmental patterns of expression but appear to function similarly. The C subunits are 40-kDa proteins that contain the binding sites for protein substrates and ATP. The R subunits are 49-to 51-kDa proteins that contain two cAMP-binding sites. In addition, the R subunit dimer contains a region that interacts with cellular anchoring proteins that serve to localize PKA appropriately within the cell.The binding of second messengers by PKA and the other second-messenger-regulated kinases relieves an inhibitory constraint and thus activates the enzymes PKA phosphorylates Ser or Thr at specifi c sites in dozens of proteins. The sequences of amino acids at the phosphorylation sites are not identical. Each kinase has a characteristic consensus sequence that forms the basis for distinct substrate specifi cities.A regulatory theme common to PKA, CaM kinase II, and PKC is that their second messengers activate them by displacing an autoinhibitory domain from the active site Most of the effects of Ca 2 in neurons and other cell types are mediated by calmodulin, and many of the effects of Ca 2 -calmodulin are mediated by protein phosphorylation-dephosphorylation The catalytic, regulatory, and targeting domains of CaM kinase II are all contained within a single polypeptide Regulation of the kinase by autophosphorylation is a critical feature of CaM kinase II. The kinase is inactive in the basal state because an autoinhibitory segment distorts the active site and sterically blocks access to its substrates. Binding of Ca 2 -calmodulin to the calmodulin-binding domain of the kinase displaces the autoinhibitory domain from the catalytic site and thus activating the kinase by enabling ATP and protein substrates to bind. Displacement of this domain also exposes a binding site for anchoring proteins that the activated kinase can bind. If the kinase is activated, it can autophosphorylate Thr-286. Phosphorylation disables the autoinhibitory segment by preventing it from reblocking the active site after calmodulin dissociates and thereby locks the kinase in a partially active state that is independent, or autonomous, of Ca 2 -calmodulin and can anchor to additional targets. Autophosphorylation prolongs the active state of the kinase, a potentiation that led to its description as a cognitive kinase.CaM kinase II is targeted to distinct cellular compartments. Differences between the four genes encoding CaM kinase II and between the two or more isoforms that are encoded by each gene by apparent alternative splicing reside primarily in a variable region at the start of the association domain Protein kinase C is a collective name for members of a relatively diverse family of protein kinases most closely associated with the PI-signaling system. PKC is a multifunctional SerThr kinase capable of modulating many cellular processes, including exocytosis and endocytosis of neurotransmitter vesicles, neuronal plasticity, gene expression, regulation of cell growth and cell cycle, ion channels, and receptors. The role of DAG generated during PI signaling was unclear until its link to PKC was established. Many PKC isoforms also require an acidic phospholipid such as phosphatidylserine for appropriate activation. The kinase is also of interest because it is the target of a class of tumor promoters called phorbol esters. They activate PKC by simulating the action of DAG, bypassing the normal receptor-based pathway, and inappropriately stimulating cell growth.We now understand that the PKC family of kinases is diverse in structure and regulatory properties. PKC is monomeric with catalytic, regulatory, and targeting domains all on one polypeptide  VI, which contains the autoinhibitory or pseudosubstrate sequence  C1, a cysteine rich domain that binds DAG and phorbol esters  C2, a region necessary for Ca 2 sensitivity and for binding to phosphatidylserine and to anchoring proteins  V3, a protease-sensitive hinge  C34, the catalytic domain  V5, which may also mediate anchoring Another class of isoforms, termed novel PKCs, lacks a true C2 domain and is therefore not Ca 2 sensitive. Another class is considered atypical because it lacks C2 and the fi rst of two cysteine-rich domains that are necessary for DAG sensitivity. This class is neither Ca 2 nor DAG sensitive. Not included is a DAG-interacting kinase originally designated as PKC-m and now termed PKD because its catalytic domain is different from the other PKC isoforms.Activation of PKC is best understood for the conventional isoforms. Generation of DAG resulting from stimulation of the PI-signaling pathway increases the affi nity of cPKC isoforms for Ca 2 and phosphatidylserine. DAG, or specifi cally its sn-1,2-diacylglycerol isomer, is derived only from PI turnover, and it is the only isomer effective in activating PKC. Cell stimulation results in the translocation of cPKC from a variety of sites to the membrane or cytoskeletal elements where it interacts with PS-Ca 2 -DAG at the membrane. Binding of the second messengers to the regulatory domain disrupts the nearby autoinhibitory domain, leading to a reversible activation of PKC by deinhibition, as is found for PKA and CaM kinase II. Translocation is not restricted to the plasma membrane. Upon activation some PKC isoforms reversibly translocate to intracellular sites enriched with anchoring proteins, termed receptors for activated C kinase.Prolonged activation of PKC can be produced by the addition of phorbol esters, which simulate activation by DAG but remain in the cell until they are washed out. In a matter of hours to days, such persistent activation by phorbol esters leads to a degradation of PKC. This phenomenon is sometimes used experimentally to produce a PKC-depleted cell and thereafter to test for a loss of putative PKC functions.Protein kinases and protein phosphatases often are positioned spatially near their substrates or they translocate to their substrates upon activation to improve speed and specifi city in response to neurotransmitter stimulation. For example, A Kinase Anchoring Protein 79, although fi rst identifi ed with PKA binding, also has binding site for PKC and calcineurin The use of anchoring proteins has several consequences. First, rate of phosphorylation and specifi city are enhanced when kinases or phosphatases are concentrated near intended substrates. Second, it increases the signal-to-noise ratio for substrates that are not near anchoring proteins by reducing basal state phosphorylation. For example, PKA is anchored on the Golgi away from the nucleus so that phosphorylation in the basal state or even after a brief stimulus produces little phosphorylation of nuclear proteins. Prolonged stimuli, however, enable some C subunits to diffuse passively through nuclear pores and regulate gene expression. Termination of the nuclear action of C subunits is aided by PKI, which acts to inhibit and export it back out of the nucleus. Third, anchoring can enable signifi cant phosphorylation of nearby substrates at basal cAMP, such as a Ca 2 channel phosphorylated when its phosphorylation site is exposed during depolarization.The ability of three major SerThr kinases in brain to initiate or maintain synaptic changes that underlie learning and memory may require that they themselves undergo some form of persistent change in activity. Both their functional and molecular properties led to their description as cognitive kinases.A role for PKA as a cognitive kinase can be seen in long-term facilitation of the gill-withdrawal refl ex in Aplysia and in long-term potentiation in the rodent hippocampus. In motor neuron cultures, repeated or prolonged exposure to serotonin or cAMP leads to long-term facilitation because PKA becomes persistently active despite the fact that cAMP is no longer elevated CaM kinase II has features of a cognitive kinase because it has a molecular memory based on autophosphorylation and it phosphorylates proteins that modulate synaptic plasticity 100% 100%ATP ATP P P P P P P P P P P P P P P FIGURE 10.13 Frequency-dependent activation of CaM kinase II. Autophosphorylation occurs when both neighboring subunits in a holoenzyme are bound to calmodulin. At a high frequency of stimulation, the interspike interval is too short to allow signifi cant dephosphorylation or dissociation of calmodulin, thereby increasing the probability of autophosphorylation with each successive spike. In a simplifi ed CaM kinase with only six subunits, calmodulin-bound subunits are shown in pink and autophosphorylated subunits with trapped calmodulin are shown in red. Adapted from CaM kinase II phosphorylates a number of substrates that affect synaptic strength. Inhibition of CaM kinase II in hippocampal slices or just elimination of its autophosphorylation by an a-CaM kinase II mouse knock-in in which the critical Thr was replaced by Ala blocks autonomy and the induction of long-term potentiation. These mice are defi cient in learning spatial navigational cues, one of the functions of the rodent hippocampus. The basis for its role is uncertain but may be the phosphorylation of AMPA receptors and their recruitment to the membrane, leading to a greater postsynaptic response PKC can also be converted into a form that is independent, or autonomous, of its second messenger and can be described as a cognitive kinase. Physiological activation of PKC can lead to proteolyic removal of its inhibitory domain, thus converting it to a constitutively active kinase termed protein kinase M. However, during the persistent phase of long-term potentiation, some of the PKC is converted to PKM Protein kinases that phosphorylate tyrosine residues usually are associated with the regulation of cell growth and differentiation. Signal transduction by protein tyrosine kinases often includes a cascade of kinases phosphorylating other kinases, eventually activating SerThr kinases, which carry out the intended modifi cation of a cellular process. There are both receptor tyrosine kinases, activated by the binding of extracellular growth factors such as nerve growth factor and epidermal growth factor and soluble ones, activated indirectly by extracellular ligands such as c-Src.Protein phosphatases in neuronal signaling are categorized as either phosphoserine-phosphothreonine phosphatases or phosphotyrosine phosphatases PP-1 and calcineurin are the best characterized phosphatases with regard to both structure and regulation. The domain structures of the catalytic subunits of PP-1 and calcineurin are depicted in PP-1 and PP-2A normally are complexed in cells with specifi c anchoring or targeting subunits. Targeting of PP-1 can be modulated by phosphorylation of its targets. As PP-1 dissociates from targeting subunits, it becomes susceptible to inhibition by inhibitor-2.Inhibition of PP-1 by two other inhibitors, inhibitor-1 and its homologue DARPP-32, is conditional on their phosphorylation by either PKA or PKG Inhibitor-1, DARPP-32, and inhibitor-2 are all selective for PP-1. Highly selective inhibitors capable of penetrating the cell membrane are available for these phosphatases. Okadaic acid, a natural product of marine dinofl agellates, is a tumor promoter but, unlike phorbol esters, it acts on PP-2A and PP-1 rather than on PKC.Protein Phosphatase 1 The X-ray structure of the catalytic subunit of PP-1 bound to the toxin microcystin, a cyclic peptide inhibitor, reveals PP-1 to be a compact ellipsoid with hydrophobic and acidic surfaces forming a cleft for binding substrates. PP-1 is a metalloenzyme requiring two metals in the active site that likely take part in electrostatic interactions with the phosphate on substrates that aid in catalyzing the hydrolytic reaction. Substrate binding is blocked when phospho-inhibitor-1 or microcrystin LR binds to this surface.Calcineurin is a Ca 2 -calmodulin-dependent phosphatase that is highly enriched in the brain. It is a heterodimer with a 60-kDa subunit that contains an N-terminal catalytic domain similar to PP-1 and a C-terminal regulatory domain that includes an autoinhibitory segment, a calmodulin- The state of phosphorylation of protein substrates is regulated dynamically by protein kinases and phosphatases. In the striatum, for example, dopamine stimulates PKA, which converts DARPP-32 into an effective inhibitor of PP-1. This increases the steady-state level of phosphorylation of a hypothetical substrate subject to phosphorylation by a variety of protein kinases. This action can be countered by NMDA receptor stimulation by another stimulus that increases intracellular Ca 2 and activates calcineurin. PP-1 is deinhibited and dephosphorylates the phosphorylated substrate when calcineurin deactives DARPP-32-P. Adapted from Cross talk between protein kinases and protein phosphatases is critical to their ability to integrate inputs into neurons Major goals of signal transduction research are to delineate pathways by which signals such as neurotransmitters transduce their signals to modify cellular processes. This is often the start of a process to identify targets for therapeutic intervention in disease. Cellular and biochemical assays can often identify the entire signaling pathway, from stimulation of receptor, to generation of a second-messenger activation of a kinase or phosphatase, change in the phosphorylation state of the substrate, and an ultimate change in its functional state. Such investigations utilize a variety of pharmacological inhibitors or activators of the signaling molecules complemented by genetic approaches that utilize transfection of activated forms of the kinases or phosphatases in question, siRNAs, transgenic animals, and mice with individual signaling components knocked out.The morphology of a cell is determined by protein constituents. Its function is regulated by the phosphorylation or dephosphorylation of the proteins. Phosphorylation modifi es the function of regulatory proteins subsequent to their genetic expression. The activities of the protein kinases and protein phosphatases typically are regulated by second messengers and extracellular ligands. Kinases and phosphatases integrate and encode stimulation of a large group of cellular receptors. The number of possible effects is almost limitless and enables the tuning of cellular processes over a broad time scale. Most of the effects of Ca 2 in cells are mediated by calmodulin, which in turn mediates changes in protein phosphorylation-dephosphorylation. The phosphoinositol signaling system is mediated through PKC, which modulates many cellular processes from exocytosis to gene expression. All three classes of enzymes discussed have been described as cognitive kinases because they are capable of sustaining their activated states after their secondmessenger stimuli have returned to basal levels. PKA has been implicated in learning and memory in Aplysia and in hippocampus, where it is involved in long-term potentiation. Protein phosphatases play an equally important role in neuronal signaling by dephosphorylating proteins. Cross talk between protein kinases and protein phosphatases is key to their ability to integrate inputs into neurons.The fi rst part of this chapter describes how signaling systems regulate the function of cellular proteins already expressed another critical level of control exerted by these systems is their ability to regulate the synthesis of cellular proteins by regulating the expression of specifi c genes. For all living cells, regulation of gene expression by intracellular signals is a fundamental mechanism of development, homeostasis, and adaptation to the environment. Protein phosphorylation and regulation of gene expression by intracellular signals are the most important mechanisms underlying the remarkable degree of plasticity exhibited by neurons. Alterations in gene expression underlie many forms of long-term changes in neural functioning, with a time course that ranges from hours to many years.Information contained within DNA must be expressed through other molecules: RNA and proteins. The human genome contains approximately 25,000 genes that encode structural RNAs or proteincoding messenger RNAs. Regulated gene expression conferred by the nucleotide sequence of the DNA itself is called cis regulation because the control regions are linked physically on the DNA to regions that can potentially be transcribed. The cis regulatory sequences function by serving as high-affi nity binding sites for regulatory proteins called transcription factors.The transcription of specifi c genes into mRNA is carried out by a complex enzyme called RNA polymerase II. Roger Kornberg won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2006 for his studies on the molecular basis for eukaryotic transcription. Transcription often is divided into three steps: initiation of RNA synthesis, RNA chain elongation, and chain termination. Extracellular signals, such as neurotransmitters, hormones, drugs, and growth factors generally control the transcription initiation step.Transcription initiation requires two critical processes: positioning of RNA polymerase II at the correct start site of the gene to be transcribed and controlling the effi ciency of initiations to produce the appropriate transcriptional rate for the circumstances of the cell The promoters for RNA polymerase II transcribed genes contain a distinct basal promoter element on which a basal transcription complex is assembled. The basal promoter of most of these genes contains a sequence called a TATA box that is rich in the nucleotides adenine and thymine located between 25 and 30 bases upstream of the transcription start site.To achieve signifi cant levels of transcription, this multiprotein assembly requires help from sequencespecifi c transcriptional activators that recognize and bind distinct cis-regulatory elements. Functional cisregulatory elements are generally 7-12 in length and structured as a palindrome, each of which is a specifi c binding site for one or more transcription factors. Each gene has a particular combination of cis-regulatory elements, the nature, number, and spatial arrangement of which determine the genes unique pattern of expression, including the cell types in which it is expressed, the times during development in which it is expressed, and the level at which it is expressed in adults both basally and in response to physiological signals Many transcription factors are active only as dimers or higher order complexes formed via a multimerization domain. Both partners in a dimer commonly contribute jointly to both the DNA-binding domain and the activation domain. Dimerization can be a mechanism of either positive or negative control of transcription. The effects of sequence-specifi c transcriptional activator and represser factors frequently are mediated by adapter proteins Intracellular signals play a major role in the regulation of gene expression, for example via nuclear translocation andor phosphorylation of activator proteins. Signal-directed change in location or conformation of these proteins permit information obtained by the cell from its different signaling systems to regulate gene expression appropriate to the status of the cell.Extracellular control of transcription requires a translocation step by which the signal is transmitted through the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Some transcription factors are themselves translocated to the nucleus. For example, the transcription factor NF-kB is retained in the cytoplasm by its binding protein IkB, which masks the NF-kB nuclear localization signal. Signal-regulated phosphorylation of IkB by PKC and other protein kinases leads to dissociation of NF-kB, permitting it to enter the nucleus. Other transcription factors must be directly phosphorylated or dephosphorylated to bind DNA. In many cytokine-signaling pathways, plasma membrane receptor tyrosine phosphorylation of transcription factors known as signal transducers and activators of transcription permits their multimerization, which in turn permits both nuclear translocation and construction of an effective DNA-binding site within the multimer. Yet other transcription factors, such as CREB The cAMP second-messenger pathway regulates expression of a large number of genes via cAMP response elements. Phosphorylation of CREbound CREB on its Ser-133 by activated PKA that translocates to the nucleus recruits the adapter protein CBP. This, in turn, interacts with the basal transcription complex and modifi es histones to enhance the effi ciency of transcription. CREB also serves to illustrate the convergence of signaling pathways CREB illustrates yet another important principle of transcriptional regulation: CREB is a member of a family of related proteins. Many transcription factors are members of families this permits complex forms of positive and negative regulation. CREB is closely related to other proteins called activating transcription factors and CRE modulators. The dimerization domain used by CREB-ATF proteins and several other families of transcription factors is called a leucine zipper. The dimerization motif is an a helix in which every seventh residue is a leucine based on the periodicity of a helices, the leucines line up along one face of the helix two turns apart. Dimerization juxtaposes the adjacent basic, DNA binding, regions of each of the partners. This combination of motifs is why this superfamily of proteins is referred to as basic leucine zipper proteins.Activator protein 1 is another family of bZIP transcription factors that play a central role in the regulation of neural gene expression by extracellular signals. The AP-1 family comprises multiple proteins that bind as heterodimers to the DNA sequence TGACTCA. Although the AP-1 sequence differs from the CRE sequence by only a single base, this one-base difference strongly biases protein binding away from the CREB family of proteins. AP-1 sequences confer responsiveness to the PKC pathway. AP-1 proteins generally bind DNA as heterodimers composed of one member each of two different families of related bZIP proteins, the Fos family and the Jun family, providing for a multiplicity of regulatory control.Genes that are activated transcriptionally by synaptic activity, drugs, and growth factors often have been classifi ed roughly into two groups. Genes, such as the c-fos gene itself, that are activated rapidly, transiently, and without requiring new protein synthesis often are described as cellular immediate-early genes. Genes that are induced or repressed more slowly and are dependent on new protein synthesis have been described as late-response genes. Several IEGs have been used as cellular markers of neural activation because they are markedly induced by depolarization and second-messenger and growth factor pathways, permitting novel approaches to functional neuroanatomy.The protein products of those cellular IEGs that function as transcription factors bind to cis-regulatory elements contained within a subset of late-response genes to activate or repress them The c-fos gene is activated rapidly by neurotransmitters or drugs that stimulate the cAMP pathway or Ca 2 elevation. Both pathways produce phosphorylation of transcription factor CREB. The c-fos gene contains three binding sites for CREB. The c-fos gene can also be induced by the RasMAP kinase pathway, which is activated by a number of growth factors. For example, neurotrophins, such as nerve growth factor, bind a family of receptor tyrosine kinases NGF interacts with Trk A, which activates Ras. Ras then acts through a cascade of protein kinases. Cross talk between neurotransmitter and growth factor-signaling pathways has been documented with increasing frequency and likely plays an important role in the precise tuning of neural plasticity to diverse environmental stimuli.Expression of most of the proteins of the Fos and Jun families that constitute transcription factor AP-1 and the binding of AP-1 proteins to DNA is regulated by extracellular signals. Phosphorylation and activation of c-Jun can result from the action of Jun Nterminal kinase. JNK is a member of the mitogen activated protein kinase family of protein kinases. JNK also has been shown to be activated by neurotransmitters, including glutamate. Thus, AP-1-mediated transcription within the nervous system requires multiple steps, beginning with the activation of genes encoding AP-1 proteins. With regard to function, the boundary between trophic, or growth, factors and cytokines in the nervous system has become increasingly arbitrary. However, cell-signaling mechanisms offer a useful means of distinction. Growth factors, such as neurotrophins, epidermal growth factor, and fi broblast growth factor, act through receptor protein tyrosine kinases, whereas cytokines, such as leukemia inhibitory factor, ciliary neurotrophic factor, and interleukin-6, act through nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinases.LIF, CNTF, and IL-6 subserve a wide array of overlapping functions inside and outside the nervous system, including hematopoietic and immunologic functions outside the nervous system and regulation of neuronal survival, differentiation, and, in certain circumstances, plasticity within the nervous system. Their receptors contain a common signal-transducing subunit, gp130. Receptors for these cytokines consist of a signal-transducing b component, which includes gp130, and interacts with nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinases of the Janus kinase family. Some cytokine receptors interact only with a single Jak PTK whereas others interact with multiple Jak PTKs.Signal transduction to the nucleus includes tyrosine phosphorylation by the Jak PTKs of one or more of the STAT proteins mentioned earlier. Upon phosphorylation, STAT proteins form dimers through the association of SH2 domains, an important type of protein interaction domain. Dimerization is thought to trigger translocation to the nucleus, where STATs bind their cognate cytokine response elements. Different STATs become activated by different cytokine receptors, not because of differential use of Jak PTKs, but because of specifi c coupling of certain STATs to certain receptors. Thus, for example, the IL-6 receptor preferentially activates STAT1 and STAT3 the CNTF receptor preferentially activates STAT3. Cytokine response elements, to which STATs bind, have now been identifi ed within many neural genes, including vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and several other neuropeptide genes.The differentiation of many cell types in the brain is established by exposure to steroids. Steroid hormones, including glucocorticoids, sex steroids, mineralocorticoids, retinoids, thyroid hormone, and vitamin D, are small lipid-soluble ligands that can diffuse across cell membranes. They act on their receptors within the cell cytoplasm in marked distinction to the other types of intercellular signals described herein. Another unique feature of steroid hormones is that their receptors are themselves transcription factors. Each has a transcriptional-activation domain at its amino terminus, a DNA-binding domain, and a hormone-binding domain at its carboxy terminus. DNA-binding domains recognize specifi c palindromic DNA sequences, steroid hormone response elements, within the regulatory regions of specifi c genes.After having been bound by hormone, activated steroid hormone receptors translocate into the nucleus, where they bind to their cognate response elements. Such binding then increases or decreases the rate at which these target genes are transcribed, depending on the precise nature and DNA sequence context of the element.The formation of long-term memories requires changes in gene expression and new protein synthesis. It is at transcription initiation that extracellular signals such as neurotransmitters, hormones, drugs, and growth factors exert their most signifi cant control. The transcription is modulated by transcription factors that recruit the RNA polymerases to the DNA. For example, the critical nuclear translocation step in the activation of transcription factor CREB involves the catalytic subunit of PKA, which can phosphorylate CREB on entering the nucleus. In addition, increasing evidence indicates that at least some forms of long-term memory require new gene expression.Genes that encode the transcription factors themselves may respond quickly or slowly. These genes have been coined third messengers in signal transduction cascades. Cross talk between neurotransmitter and growth factor-signaling pathways is likely to play an important role in the precise tuning of neuronal plasticity to diverse environmental stimuli.The active, mature transcription complex is a remarkable architectural assembly of RNA polymerase II, transcription factors, and adaptors assembled at the basal promoter. Cells can exert exquisite control of the genes being transcribed in a variety of situations for example, to govern appropriate entry or exit from the cell cycle, to maintain appropriate cellular identity, and to respond appropriately to extracellular signals.Transcription can be regulated by many different extracellular signals modulated by a large array of signaling pathways and a complex array of typically dimeric transcription factors. In this chapter, regulation has been illustrated by only a few of the families of transcription factors. Those chosen appear to play important roles in the nervous system and illustrate many of the basic principles of gene regulation.The study of synaptic transmission in the central nervous system provides an opportunity to learn more about the diversity and richness of mechanisms underlying this process and to learn how some of the fundamental signaling properties of the nervous system, such as action potentials and synaptic potentials, work together to process information and generate behavior.Postsynaptic potentials in the CNS can be divided into two broad classes on the basis of mechanisms and, generally, duration of these potentials. One class is based on the direct binding of a transmitter molecule with a receptor-channel complex these receptors are ionotropic. The structure of these receptors is discussed in detail in Chapter 9. The resulting PSPs are generally short-lasting and hence sometimes are called fast PSPs they have also been referred to as "classical" because they were the fi rst synaptic potentials to be recorded in the CNS The other class of PSPs is based on the indirect effect of a transmitter molecule binding with a receptor. The receptors that produce these PSPs are metabotropic. As discussed in Chapter 9, the receptors activate G proteins that affect the channel either directly or through additional steps in which the level of a second messenger is altered. The changes in membrane potential produced by metabotropic receptors can be long-lasting and therefore are called slow PSPs. The mechanisms for fast PSPs mediated by ionotropic receptors are considered fi rst.The stretch refl ex, one of the simpler behaviors mediated by the central nervous system, is a useful example with which to examine the properties and functional consequences of ionotropic PSPs. The tap of a neurologists hammer to a ligament elicits a refl ex extension of the leg, as illustrated in Mechanisms responsible for fast EPSPs mediated by ionotropic receptors in the CNS are fairly well known. Moreover, the ionic mechanisms for EPSPs in the CNS are essentially identical with the ionic mechanisms at the skeletal neuromuscular junction. Specifi cally, the transmitter substance released from the presynaptic terminal diffuses across the synaptic cleft, binds to specifi c receptor sites on the postsynaptic membrane, and leads to a simultaneous increase in permeability to Na  and K  , which makes the membrane potential move toward a value of about 0 mV. However, the processes of synaptic transmission at the sensory neuron-motor neuron synapse and the motor neuron-skeletal muscle synapse differ in two fundamental ways: in the transmitter used and in the amplitude of the PSP. The transmitter substance at the neuromuscular junction is ACh, whereas that released by the sensory neurons is an amino acid, probably glutamate. Indeed, glutamate is the most common transmitter that mediates excitatory actions in the CNS. The amplitude of the postsynaptic potential at the neuromuscular junction is about 50 mV consequently, each PSP depolarizes the postsynaptic cell beyond threshold so there is a one-to-one relation between an action potential in the spinal motor neuron and an action potential in the skeletal muscle cell. Indeed, the EPP must depolarize the muscle cell by only about 30 mV to initiate an action potential, allowing a safety factor of about 20 mV. In contrast, the EPSP in a spinal motor neuron produced by an action potential in an afferent fi ber has an amplitude of only about 1 mV. The mechanisms by which these small PSPs can trigger an action potential in the postsynaptic neuron are discussed in a later section of this chapter and in Chapter 12. terminals of specialized stretch receptors. The action potentials propagate to the spinal cord through afferent fi bers. The afferents make excitatory connections with extensor motor neurons. Action potentials initiated in the extensor motor neuron propagate to the periphery and lead to the activation and subsequent contraction of the extensor muscle. The afferent fi bers also activate interneurons that inhibit the fl exor motor neurons.Patch-clamp techniques The experiment illustrated in As a result of the type of patch-recording techniques heretofore described, three general conclusions about the properties of ligand-gated channels can be drawn. First, ACh, as well as other transmitters that activate ionotropic receptors, causes the opening of individual ionic channels This simulation is valid given the assumption that the statistical properties of a single channel over time are the same as the statistical properties of the ensemble at one instant of time. The ensemble average can be fi t with an exponential function with a decay time constant of 2.7 ms. An additional observation is that the value of the time constant is equal to the mean duration of the channel openings. The curve in The ensemble average of single-channel currents Analytical expressions that describe the shape of the ensemble average of the open lifetimes and the mean open lifetime can be derived by considering that singlechannel opening and closing is a stochastic process In this scheme, a represents the rate constant for channel closing and b the rate constant for channel opening. The scheme can be simplifi ed further if we consider a case in which the channel has been opened by the agonist and the agonist is removed instantaneously. A channel so opened will then close after a certain random time Although statistical analysis can be a valuable source of insight into the statistical nature of the gating process and the molecular determinants of the macroscopic postsynaptic potential, the description in the preceding section is a simplifi cation of the actual processes. Specifi cally, a more complete description must include the kinetics of receptor binding and unbinding and the determinants of the channel opening, as well as the fact that channels display rapid transitions between open and closed states during a single agonist receptor occupancy. Thus, the open states illustrated in Figures 11.3B and 11.4A represent the period of a burst of extremely rapid openings and closings. If the bursts of rapid channel openings and closings are thought of, and behave functionally, as a single continuous channel closure, the formalism developed in the preceding section is a reasonable approximation for many ligand-gated channels. Nevertheless, a more complex reaction scheme is necessary to quantitatively explain available data. Such a scheme would include the following states, Note that the lower part of the reaction scheme is equivalent to the one developed earlier that is,With the use of probability theory, equations describing transitions between the states can be determined. The approach is identical to that used in the simplifi ed two-state scheme. However, the mathematics and analytical expressions are more complex. For some receptors, additional states must be represented. For example, as described in Chapter 9, some ligandgated channels exhibit a process of desensitization in which continued exposure to a ligand results in channel closure.What ions are responsible for the synaptic current that produces the EPSP Early studies of the ionic mechanisms underlying the EPSP at the skeletal neuromuscular junction yielded important information. Specifi cally, voltage-clamp and ion-substitution experiments indicated that the binding of transmitter to receptors on the postsynaptic membrane led to a simultaneous increase in Na  and K  permeability that depolarized the cell toward a value of about 0 mV the patch is depolarized artifi cially to a value of about 0 mV, an identical puff of transmitter produces no current in the patch. If the patch potential is depolarized to a value of about 20 mV and the puff is delivered again, openings are again observed, but the fl ow of current through the channel is reversed in sign a series of upward defl ections indicate outward single-channel currents. In summary, there are downward defl ections when the membrane potential is at 40 mV, no defl ections when the membrane is at 0 mV, and upward defl ections when the membrane potential is moved to 20 mV. The simple explanation for these results is that no matter what the membrane potential, the effect of the transmitter binding with receptors is to produce a permeability change that tends to move the membrane potential toward 0 mV. If the membrane potential is more negative than 0 mV, an inward current is recorded. If the membrane potential is more positive than 0mV, an outward current is recorded. If the membrane potential is at 0 mV, there is no defl ection because the membrane potential is already at 0 mV. At 0 mV, the channels are opening and closing as they always do in response to the agonist, but there is no net movement of ions through them. This 0-mV level is known as the synaptic null potential or reversal potential because it is the potential at which the sign of the synaptic current reverses. The fact that the experimentally determined reversal potential equals the calculated value obtained by using the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation provides strong support for the theory that the EPSP is due to the opening of channels that have equal permeabilities to Na  and K  . Ion-substitution experiments also confi rm this theory. Thus, when the concentration of Na  or K  in the extracellular fl uid is altered, the value of the reversal potential shifts in a way predicted by the GHK equation. Different families of ionotropic receptors have different reversal potentials because each has unique ion selectivity. In addition, it should now be clear that the sign of the synaptic action depends on the value of the reversal potential relative to the resting potential. If the reversal potential of an ionotropic receptor channel is more positive than the resting potential, opening of that channel will lead to depolarization. In contrast, if the reversal potential of an ionotropic receptor channel is more negative than the resting potential, opening of that channel will lead to hyperpolarization that is, an inhibitory postsynaptic potential, which is the topic of a later section in this chapter.Plotting the average peak value of single-channel currents versus the membrane potential at which they are recorded where g sc is the single-channel conductance and E r is the reversal potential.We now know that the sign of a synaptic action can be predicted by knowledge of the relation between the resting potential and the reversal potential, but how can the precise amplitude be determined The answer to this question lies in understanding the relation between synaptic conductance and extra synaptic conductances. These interactions can be rather complex, but some initial understanding can be obtained by analyzing an electrical equivalent circuit for these two major conductance branches. We fi rst need to move from a consideration of singlechannel conductances and currents to that of macroscopic conductances and currents. The postsynaptic membrane contains thousands of any one type of ionotropic receptor, and each of these receptors could be activated by transmitter released by a single action potential in a presynaptic neuron. Because conductances in parallel add, the total conductance change produced by their simultaneous activation would bewhere g sc , as before, is the single-channel conductance, P is the probability of opening of a single channel, and N is the total number of ligand-gated channels in the postsynaptic membrane. The macroscopic postsynaptic current produced by the transmitter released by a single presynaptic action potential can then be described by.3 can be represented physically by a voltage measured across a circuit consisting of a resistor in series with a battery. An equivalent circuit of a membrane containing such a conductance is illustrated in . When the switch is open, the membrane potential is equal to the value of the leakage battery. Closure of the switch tends to polarize the membrane potential toward the value of the battery in series with the synaptic conductance. Although the effect of the channel openings is to depolarize the postsynaptic cell toward E r, this value is never achieved because ligand-gated receptors are only a small fraction of the ion channels in the membrane. Other channels tend to hold the membrane potential at E L and prevent the membrane potential from reaching the 0-mV level. In terms of the equivalent electrical circuit An analytical expression that can be a source of insight into the production of an EPSP by the engagement of a synaptic conductance can be derived by examining the current fl owing in each of the two conductance branches of the circuit in Similarly, the current fl owing through the leakage conductance is equal toBy conservation of current, the two currents must be equal and opposite. Therefore,Rearranging and solving for V m , we obtainNote that when the synaptic channels are closed, g syn is 0 andNow consider the case of ligand-gated channels being opened by the release of transmitter from a presynaptic neuron and a neuron with g L  10 nS, E L  60 mV, g syn  0.2 nS, and E r  0 mV. 9   Thus, as a result of the closure of the switch, the membrane potential has changed from its initial value of 60 mV to a new value of 59 mV that is, an EPSP of 1 mV has been generated. The preceding analysis ignored membrane capacitance, the charging of which makes the synaptic potential slower than the synaptic current. Thus, a more complete analytical description of the postsynaptic factors underlying the generation of a PSP must account for the fact that some of the synaptic current will fl ow into the capacitative branch of the circuit. Again, by conservation of current, the sum of the currents in the three branches must equal 0. Therefore,where C m is the capacitative current. By solving for V m and integrating the differential equation, we can determine the magnitude and time course of a PSP. An accurate description of the kinetics of the PSP requires that the simple switch closure be replaced with an expression g syn For many PSPs mediated by ionotropic receptors, the current-voltage relation of the synaptic current is linear or approximately linear NMDA glutamate channels are a class of ionotropic receptors that have nonlinear current-voltage relations. At negative potentials, the channel conductance is low even when glutamate is bound to the receptor. As the membrane is depolar-ized, conductance increases and current fl owing through the channel increases, resulting in the type of I-V relation illustrated in Some synaptic events decrease the probability of generating action potentials in the postsynaptic cell. Potentials associated with these actions are called inhibitory postsynaptic potentials. Consider the inhibitory interneuron illustrated in What are the ionic mechanisms for these fast IPSPs and what is the transmitter substance Because the membrane potential of the fl exor motor neuron is about 65 mV, one might expect an increase in the conductance to some ion with an equilibrium potential more negative than 65 mV. One possibility is K  . Indeed, the K  equilibrium potential in spinal motor neurons is about  80 mV thus, a transmitter substance that produced a selective increase in K  conductance would lead to an IPSP. The K  -conductance increase would move the membrane potential from 65 mV toward the K  equilibrium potential of 80 mV. Although an increase in K  conductance mediates IPSPs at some inhibitory synapses, it does not at the synapse between the inhibitory interneuron and the spinal motor neuron. At this particular synapse, the IPSP seems to be due to a selective increase in Cl  conductance. The equilibrium potential for Cl  in spinal motor neurons is about 70 mV. Thus, the transmitter substance released by the inhibitory neuron diffuses across the cleft and interacts with receptor sites on the postsynaptic membrane. These receptors are normally closed, but when opened they become selectively permeable to Cl  . As a result of the increase in Cl  conductance, the membrane potential moves from a resting value of 65 mV toward the Cl  equilibrium potential of 70 mV.As in the sensory neuron-spinal motor neuron synapse, the transmitter substance released by the inhibitory interneuron in the spinal cord is an amino acid, but in this case the transmitter is glycine. The toxin strychnine is a potent antagonist of glycine receptors. Although glycine originally was thought to be localized to the spinal cord, it is also found in other regions of the nervous system. The most common transmitter associated with inhibitory actions in many areas of the brain is g-aminobutyric acid.GABA receptors are divided into three major classes: GABA A , GABA B , and GABA C Ionotropic receptors that lead to the generation of IPSPs and ionotropic receptors that lead to the generation of EPSPs have biophysical features in common. Indeed, analyses of the preceding section are generally applicable. A quantitative understanding of the effects of the opening of glycine or GABA A receptors can be obtained by using the electrical equivalent circuit of The transmitter released from a presynaptic terminal diffuses across the synaptic cleft, where it binds to ionotropic receptors. In many cases, the postsynaptic receptors are homogeneous. In other cases, the same transmitter activates more than one type of receptor. A major example of this type of heterogeneous postsynaptic action is the simultaneous activation by glutamate of NMDA and AMPA receptors on the same postsynaptic cell. Dual-component PSPs need not be strictly inhibitory or excitatory. For example, a presynaptic cholinergic neuron in the mollusk Aplysia produces a diphasic excitatory-inhibitory response in its postsynaptic follower cell. The response can be simulated by local discrete application of ACh to the postsynaptic cell Synaptic potentials mediated by ionotropic receptors are the fundamental means by which information is transmitted rapidly between neurons. Transmitters cause channels to open in an all-or-none fashion, and the currents through these individual channels summate to produce the macrosynaptic postsynaptic potential. The sign of the postsynaptic potential is determined by the relationship between the membrane potential of the postsynaptic neuron and the ion selectivity of the ionotropic receptor.A common feature of the types of synaptic actions heretofore described is the direct binding of the transmitter with the receptor-channel complex. An entirely separate class of synaptic actions has as its basis the indirect coupling of the receptor with the channel. Two major types of coupling mechanisms have been identifi ed: coupling of the receptor and channel through an intermediate regulatory protein, such as a G-protein and coupling through a diffusible second-messenger system. Because coupling through a diffusible second-messenger system is the most common mechanism, it is the focus of this section.A comparison of the features of direct, fast ionotropic-mediated and indirect, slow metabotropicmediated synaptic potentials is shown in One mechanism for a slow synaptic potential is shown in Another interesting feature of slow synaptic responses is that they are sometimes associated with decreases rather than increases in membrane conductance. For example, the particular channel illustrated in At least one reason for the long duration of slow PSPs is that second-messenger systems are slow. Take the cAMP cascade as an example. Cyclic AMP takes some time to be synthesized, but, more importantly, after synthesis, cAMP levels can remain elevated for a relatively long period. The duration of the elevation of cAMP depends on the actions of cAMP-phosphodiesterase, which breaks down cAMP. However, duration of an effect could outlast the duration of the change in the second messenger because of persistent phosphorylation of the substrate protein. Phosphate groups are removed from substrate proteins by protein phosphatases. Thus, the net duration of a response initiated by a metabotropic receptor depends on the actions of not only the synthetic and phosphorylation processes, but also the degradative and dephosphorylation processes.Activation of a second messenger by a transmitter can have a localized effect on the membrane potential through phosphorylation of membrane channels near the site of a metabotropic receptor. The effects can be more widespread and even longer lasting than depicted in from that train of action potentials in the sensory cell. Consequently, the effects of activating multiple stretch receptors add together, as do the effects of multiple EPSPs elicited by activation of a single stretch receptor. Both of these processes act in concert to depolarize the motor neuron suffi ciently to elicit one or more action potentials, which then propagate to the periphery and produce the refl ex.Temporal summation can be illustrated by fi ring action potentials in a presynaptic neuron and monitoring the resultant EPSPs. For example, in Figures 11.14A and 11.14B, a single action potential in sensory neuron 1 produces a 1-mV EPSP in the motor neuron. Two action potentials in quick succession produce two EPSPs, but note that the second EPSP occurs during the falling phase of the fi rst, and the depolarization associated with the second EPSP adds to the depolarization produced by the fi rst. Thus, two action potentials produce a summated potential that is about 2 mV in amplitude. Three action potentials in quick succession would produce a summated potential of about 3 mV. In principle, 30 action potentials in quick succession would produce a potential of about 30 mV and easily drive the cell to threshold. This summation is strictly a passive property of the cell. No special ionic conductance mechanisms are necessary. Specifi cally, the postsynaptic conductance change produced by the second of two successive action potentials adds to that produced by the fi rst. In addition, the postsynaptic membrane has a capacitance and can store charge. Thus, the membrane temporarily stores the charge of the fi rst EPSP, and the charge from the second EPSP is added to that of the fi rst.However, the "time window" for this process of temporal summation very much depends on the duration of the postsynaptic potential, and temporal summation is possible only if the presynaptic action potentials are close in time to each other. The time frame depends on the duration of changes in the synaptic conductance and the time constant. Temporal summation, however, rarely is observed to be linear as in the preceding examples, even when the postsynaptic conductance change produced by the second of two successive action potentials is identical with that produced by the fi rst and the synaptic current is slightly less because the fi rst PSP reduces the driving force protein kinases can diffuse and affect more distant membrane channels. Moreover, a long-term effect can be induced in the cell by altering gene expression. For example, protein kinase A can diffuse to the nucleus, where it can activate proteins that regulate gene expression. Detailed descriptions of second messengers and their actions are given in Chapter 10.In contrast to the rapid responses mediated by ionotropic receptors, responses mediated by metabotropic receptors are generally relatively slow to develop and persistent. These properties arise because metabotropic responses can involve the activation of second-messenger systems. By producing slow changes in the resting potential, metabotropic receptors provide longterm modulation of the effectiveness of responses generated by ionotropic receptors. Moreover, these receptors, through the engagement of second-messenger systems, provide a vehicle by which a presynaptic cell cannot only alter the membrane potential, but also produce widespread changes in the biochemical state of a postsynaptic cell.The small amplitude of the EPSP in spinal motor neurons poses an interesting question. Specifi cally, how can an EPSP with an amplitude of only 1 mV drive the membrane potential of the motor neuron to threshold and fi re the spike in the motor neuron that is necessary to produce the contraction of the muscle The answer to this question lies in the principles of temporal and spatial summation.When the ligament is stretched Spatial summation Similarly, an action potential in a second sensory neuron by itself also produces a 1-mV EPSP. Now, consider the consequences of action potentials elicited simultaneously in sensory neurons 1 and 2. The net EPSP is equal to the summation of the amplitudes of the individual EPSPs. Here, the EPSP from sensory neuron 1 is 1 mV, the EPSP from sensory neuron 2 is 1 mV, and the summated EPSP is approximately 2 mV Whether a neuron fi res in response to synaptic input depends, at least in part, on how many action potentials are produced in any one presynaptic excitatory pathway and on how many individual convergent excitatory input pathways are activated. The summation of EPSPs in time and space is only part of the process, however. The fi nal behavior of the cell is also due to the summation of inhibitory synaptic inputs in time and space, as well as to the properties of the voltage-dependent currents The fl ow of information in dendrites and the local processing of neuronal signals are discussed in Chapter 12. Several software packages are available for the development and simulation of realistic models of single neurons and neural networks. One, Simulator for Neural Networks and Action Potentials, provides mathematical descriptions of ion currents, intracellular second messengers, and ion pools, and allows simulation of current fl ow in multicompartment models of neurons.    The segment has a membrane potential V and a membrane capacitance C m . Currents arise from three sources: m voltage-dependent conductances n conductances due to electrical synapses, and n times o time-dependent conductances due to chemical synapses with each of the n presynaptic neurons. E vd and E cs are constants and represent the values of the equilibrium potential for currents due to voltage-dependent conductances and chemical synapses, respectively. V 1 -V n represent the value of the membrane potential of the coupled cells. Reprinted with permission from A hallmark of neurons is the variety of their dendrites. The branching patterns are dazzling and the size range astounding, from the large trees of cortical pyramidal neurons to the tiny size of a retinal bipolar cell, which would fi t comfortably within the cell body of a pyramidal neuron Information processing by spread of electrical current through passive branching structures has already been discussed in Chapter 5. It is being increasingly recognized that the methods introduced by Wilfrid Rall for passive properties provide the essential basis for understanding the much more complex types of information processing that can occur through the distribution of active properties within the branching tree.In this chapter we apply the Rall approach to ask the fundamental questions: what are the principles of information processing in these dendritic trees with their elaborate branching patterns, distributed connectivity, and nonlinear properties, and how are these dendrites with these properties adapted for the operational tasks of a specifi c neuron type within the microcircuits characteristic of that regionStrategies for answering these two questions may be illustrated by the synaptic organization of two cell types, the mitral and granule cells of the olfactory bulb, shown in the lower left-hand corner of This approach allows one to identify the synaptic interactions within a dendritic tree as constituting a hierarchy, within which the specifi c pattern of interactions at a given level forms the fundamental integrative unit for the next level in the hierarchy. These integrative units are sometimes referred to as microcircuits, defi ned as a specifi c pattern of interactions performing a specifi c functional operation As discussed in Chapter 5, the neuron processes information through fi ve basic types of activity: intrinsic, reception, integration, encoding, and output. We saw that understanding how these activities are integrated within the neuron starts with the rules of passive current spread. Many of the principles were worked out fi rst in the dendrites of neurons that lack axons or the ability to generate action potentials. There are many examples in invertebrate ganglia. In vertebrates, they include the retinal amacrine cell and the olfactory granule cell. These studies have shown that a dendritic tree by itself is capable of performing many basic functions required for information processing, such as the generation of intrinsic activity, input-output functions for feature extraction, parallel processing, signal-tonoise enhancement, and oscillatory activity. These cells demonstrate that there is no one thing that dendrites do they do whatever is required to process information within their particular neuron or neuronal circuit, with or without an axon.We also need to recognize that information in dendrites can take many forms. There are actions of neuropeptides on membrane receptors and internal cytoplasmic or nuclear receptors actions of second and third messengers within the neuron movement of substances within the dendrites by diffusion or by active transport and changes occurring during development. All these types of cellular traffi c and information fl ow in dendrites are coming under direct study We will focus on how this takes place in neurons with axons. Neurons with axons may be classifi ed into two groups, as suggested originally by Camillo Golgi in 1873: those with long axons and those with short axons. Long axon cells tend to be larger than short axon cells, and therefore have been more accessible to experimental analysis. Indeed, virtually everything known about the functional relations between dendrites and axons has been obtained from studies of long axon cells. Consequently, much of what we think we understand about those relations in short axon cells is only by inference.As noted in the analysis of the passive properties of neurons in Chapter 5, there are a number of sites on the Web that support the analysis of complex neurons and their active dendrites. For orientation to the molecular properties of dendritic compartments of different neurons discussed in this chapter, consult senselab.med.yale.eduneurondb for computational models based on those properties, consult senselab. med.yale.edumodeldb. For the structures of dendrites, see synapse-web.org cell centered database, and neuromorpho.org.As we saw in Chapter 5 The fi rst principle is: If a neuron has an axon, it has only one. This near universal "single axon rule" is remarkable and still little understood. It results from developmental mechanisms that provide for differentiation of a single axon from among early undifferentiated processes. These mechanisms are being analyzed especially in neuronal cultures In order to transfer information between regions, the information distributed at different sites within a dendritic tree of an output neuron must be encoded, for global output at a single site at the origin of the axon.A related principle is that the main function of the axon in long axon cells is to support the generation of action potentials in the axon hillock-initial segment region. By defi nition, action potentials there have thresholds for generation thus, the principle of frequency encoding of global output in an axonal neuron is:The results of dendritic integration affect the output through the axon by initiating or modulating action potential generation in the axon hillock-initial segment. Global output from dendritic integration is therefore encoded in impulse frequency in a single axon.Classically it has been known that the axons of most output neurons are so long that the only signifi cant signals reaching their axon terminals are the digital all-or-nothing action potentials carrying a frequency code. However, biology always produces exceptions. Recent research has shown that the synaptic potentials within the soma-dendrites may spread suffi ciently in some axons to modulate the membrane potentials of the axon terminals A further consequence of the spatial separation of dendrites and axon is that some of the activity within a dendritic tree will be below threshold for activating an axonal action potential we thus have the principle of subthreshold dendritic activity:A considerable amount of subthreshold activity, including local active potentials, can affect the integrative states of the dendrites and any local outputs, but not necessarily directly or immediately affect the global output of the neuron.We turn now to the functional properties that allow dendritic trees to process information within these constraints.We fi rst recognize, from the example in One of the fi rst examples in invertebrates was in the stomatogastric ganglion of the lobster Sets of these local input-output units, distributed throughout the neuritic tree, participate in the generation and coordination of oscillatory activity involved in controlling the rhythmic movements of the stomach. In a current model of this oscillatory circuit, these interactions are mutually inhibitory In summary, a cell with an axon can have local outputs through its dendrites, as well as distant outputs through its axon, which may be involved in specifi c local functions such as generating oscillatory circuits.Another principle that carries over from axonless cells is the ability of the dendrites of axonal cells to carry out complex computations with mostly passive properties. This is exemplifi ed by neurons that are motion detectors.Motion detection is a fundamental operation carried out by the nervous systems of most species it is essential for detecting prey and predator alike. In invertebrates, motion detection has been studied especially in the brain of the blowfl y. In the lobula plate of the third optic neuropil are tangential cells that respond to preferential direction of motion with increased depolarization due to sequential responses across their dendritic fi elds. This response has been modeled by Reichardt and colleagues by a series of elementary motion detectors in the dendrites. A compartmental model In vertebrates, motion detection is built into the visual pathway at various stages in different species: the retina, midbrain, and cerebral cortex. Studies in the optic tectum have revealed cells with splayed uniplanar dendritic trees and specialized distal appendages that appear highly homologous across reptiles, birds, and mammals Directional selectivity of dendritic processing was predicted by An important feature of many types of neuron is a separation of their dendritic fi elds, which has important functional consequences. We saw this in the compartmental organization of the mitral cell, where the primary dendritic tuft receives the olfactory nerve input whereas the secondary dendritic branches are specialized for a completely different function, self and lateral inhibition, as we explain later.Pyramidal cells in the cerebral cortex also show a clear separation into apical and basal dendrites. The apical dendrite extends across different layers, allowing fi bers within those layers from different cells to modulate the transfer of activity from the distal tuft toward the cell body. This kind of modulation is absent in the mitral cell but key in the pyramidal neuron.Within the basal dendrites, the placement of inputs is critical. An example has been shown in experiments in which excitatory and inhibitory inputs can be independently targeted to the same or different dendritic branches. As illustrated in As a fi nal example, cells with separate dendritic fi elds are critical for selectively summing their synaptic inputs to mediate directional selectivity in the auditory system An obvious problem for a neuron with an axon is that the distal branches of dendritic trees are a long distance from the site of axon origin at or near the cell body. The common perception is that these distal dendrites are too distant from the site of axonal origin and impulse generation to have more than a slow and weak background modulation of impulse output, and that the only synapses that can bring about rapid signal processing by the neuron are those located on the soma or proximal dendrites.This perception is so ingrained in our visual impression of what is near and far that it is diffi cult to accept that it is wrong. It is disproved, however, by many kinds of neurons in which specifi c inputs are located preferentially on their distal dendrites. An example is the mitral cells in the olfactory bulb, which we have met in How do distal dendrites in these neurons effectively control axonal output Some of the important properties underlying this ability are summarized in The simplest way to enhance spread of a signal through dendrites is by a large diameter. It already has been illustrated for the spread of current in a branching cable in Chapter 5 A key property is the specifi c membrane resistance of the dendritic membrane. The functional significance of R m is discussed in Chapter 5 An important factor controlling effective membrane resistance is K conductances. Chapter 5 discusses how a K channel, I h , can affect the summation of EPSPs in striatal spiny cells. There is increasing evidence that dendritic input conductance is controlled by different types of K currents A potentially important property is the amplitude of the conductance generated by the synapse itself. Early studies showed that in motor neurons, distal excitatory synaptic potentials were many times the amplitude of proximal synapses For transient responses, the electrotonic linkage becomes weaker because of the fi ltering effect of the capacitance of the membrane, and it is made worse by a higher R m , which increases the membrane time constant, thereby slowing the spread of a passive potential. This disadvantage can be overcome by depolarizing voltage-gated conductances: Na, Ca, or both. These add a wide variety of signal processing mechanisms to dendrites. As indicated in These examples illustrate an important principle of distal dendritic processing:Distal dendrites can mediate relatively rapid, specifi c information processing, even at the weakest levels of detection, in addition to slower modulation of overall neuronal activity. The spread of potentials to the site of global output from the axon is enhanced by multiple passive and active mechanisms.We see that depolarizing conductances increase the excitability of distal dendrites and the effectiveness of distal synapses, whereas K conductances reduce the excitability and control the temporal characteristics of the dendritic activity. This balance is thus crucial to the functions of dendrites. The signifi cance of a particular density of channel needs to be judged in relation to the electrotonic properties discussed in Chapter 5. For instance, a given conductance has more effect on membrane potential in smaller distal branches because of the higher input resistance These combinations of ionic conductances occur within the larger framework of the morphological types of dendritic trees, particularly whether they arise from thick or thin trunks. This has given rise to a classifi cation of dendritic types on integrative principles that cuts across the traditional classifi cation of neuron types As noted earlier, the combinations of properties within different dendritic compartments of a given neuron type can be searched in an online database and models based on these compartmental representations of many types of neurons can be accessed and run at senselab.med. yale.edumodeldb.The combination of conductances at different levels of the dendritic tree involves a delicate balance between depolarizing and hyperpolarizing actions acting over different time periods. These combinations vary in different morphological types of neurons. They also contribute to a new classifi cation of dendrites according to a principle of multiple criteria for dendritic classifi cation:Dendritic trees can be categorized functionally on the basis of a combination of branch morphology, functional ionic current type, and genetic channel subunit type. These categories appear to defi ne canonical integrative properties that extend across classical morphological categories.In cells with long axons, activity in the dendrites eventually leads to activation and modulation of action potential output in the axon. A key question is the precise site of origin of this action potential. This question was one of the fi rst to be addressed in the rise of modern neuroscience the historical background is summarized in Box 12.1.These studies established the classical model: the lowest threshold site for action potential generation is in the axonal initial segment.Defi nitive analysis was achieved by In addition to the evidence for action potential initiation in the axon hillock, another line of work has provided evidence for shifting of the site under dynamic conditions. This line began with extracellular recordings of a "population spike" that appears to propagate along the apical dendrites toward the cell body in hippocampal pyramidal cells Apart from the motor neuron, the best early model for intracellular analysis of neuronal mechanisms was the crayfi sh stretch receptor, described by cells of "fast prepotentials" at dendritic "hot spots" The olfactory mitral cell is a favorable model for studying this question, because it is unusual in that all its excitatory inputs are restricted to its distal dendritic tuft. As illustrated in Chapter 5 As the level of distal excitatory input is increased, dual-patch recordings show clearly that the action potential initiation site shifts gradually from the soma to the distal dendrite The site of global output through action potential initiation from a neuron can shift between fi rst axon node, initial segment, axon hillock, soma, proximal dendrites, and distal dendrites, depending on the dynamic state of dendritic excitability.In addition to identifying the preferential site for action potential initiation in the axonal initial segment, the experiments of What is the function of the dendritic action potential Experimental evidence shows that it can have a variety of functions.  The low threshold of the initial axonal segment favors it being the site of action potential output for a wide range of dendritic activity, but the site can shift with strongly depolarizing dendritic input. This introduces the principle of the dynamic control of action potential initiation:A specifi c function for an action potential propagating from the soma into the dendrites was fi rst suggested for the olfactory mitral cell, where mitral-togranule dendrodendritic synapses are triggered by the action potential spreading from the soma into the secondary dendrites Recent research has given new insight into the function of the action potential in the mitral cell lateral dendrite. Because the action potential can propagate away from the cell body throughout the length of the dendrite In several types of pyramidal neurons, active dendritic properties appear to boost action potential invasion so that summation with EPSPs occurs that makes the EPSPs more effective in spreading to the soma.A possible function of a back-propagating action potential is that the Na  and K  conductance increases associated with active propagation wipe out the existing membrane potential, resetting the membrane potential for new inputs.The action potential in the dendritic branches presumably depolarizes the spines, which means that the impulse depolarization would FIGURE 12.10 Direct demonstration of the impulse-initiation zone and back-propagation into dendrites using dual-patch recordings from soma and dendrites of a layer V pyramidal neuron in a slice preparation of the rat neocortex. Depolarizing current injection in either the soma or the dendrite elicits an impulse fi rst in the soma. The same result is obtained with synaptic activation of layer I input to distal dendrites. Note the close similarity of these results to the earlier fi ndings in the motor neuron Trains of action potentials generated at the somaaxon hillock can invade the dendrites to varying extents. Proximal dendrites appear to be invaded throughout a high-frequency burst, whereas distal dendrites appear to be invaded mainly by the early action potentials Activation of Ca 2 -activated K  conductances by early impulses may effectively switch off the distal dendritic compartment.The retrograde action potential can contribute to the activation of neurotransmitter release from the dendrites. The clearest example of this is the olfactory mitral cell as already described. Dynorphin released by synaptically stimulated dentate granule cells can affect the presynaptic terminals Because of the long distance between distal dendrites and initial axonal segment, we may hypothesize that the coupling between the two is not automatic. Indeed, conditional coupling dependent on synaptic inputs and intrinsic activity states at intervening dendritic sites appears to be fundamental to the relation between local dendritic inputs and global axonal output The action potential arising at the initial axonal segment has two functions: propagating into the axon to carry the global output to the axon terminals, and propagating retrogradely through the soma into the dendrites. In the dendrites the action potential can carry out many distinct functions, as described above.When the retrograde action potential has been activated by EPSPs spreading from the dendrites, we call the action potential back-propagating that is, back toward the site of the initial input. When the retrograde action potential propagates through the soma into previously unactivated dendrites, we can still call it back-propagating, in the sense of backward with regard to the law of dynamic polarization, which, when applied to the overall fl ow of activity, is from distal dendrites to soma and axon or we can consider it as propagating retrogradely, to distinguish it from back-propagating toward a distal input site.It is commonly believed that active dendrites are a modern concept, but in fact this idea is as old as Cajal he assumed that dendrites conduct impulses like axons do. However, with the fi rst intracellular recordings in the 1950s, it appeared that dendritic membranes were mostly passive. We have noted that studies since then increasingly have documented the widespread distribution and numerous functions of voltage-gated channels in dendritic membranes.These channels are the principle means for enhancing the information processing capabilities of complex dendrites. Detailed analysis of active dendritic properties began with computational studies of olfactory mitral cells and experimental studies of cerebellar Purkinje cells. Since then, studies of active dendritic properties have proliferated, particularly since introduction of the patch recording method. Several types of neurons have provided important models for the possible functional roles of active dendritic properties.The cerebellar Purkinje cell has the most elaborate dendritic tree in the nervous system, with more than 100,000 dendritic spines receiving synaptic inputs from parallel fi bers and mossy fi bers. The basic distribution of active properties in the Purkinje cell was indicated by the pioneering experiments of There are two distinct operating modes of the Purkinje cell in relation to its distinctive inputs. Climbing fi bers mediate strong depolarizing EPSPs throughout most of the dendrites that appear to give rise toFIGURE 12.12 Classical demonstration of the difference between soma and dendritic action potentials. Drawing of a Purkinje cell in the cerebellar slice. Intracellular recordings from the soma showing fast Na  spikes. Intracellular recordings from progressively more distant dendritic sites fast soma spikes become small due to electrotonic decrement and are replaced by largeamplitude dendritic Ca 2 spikes. Spread of these spikes to the soma causes an inactivating burst that interrupts the soma discharge. Adapted from The Purkinje cell thus illustrates several of the principles we have discussed. Subthreshold amplifi cation through active dendritic properties may enhance the effect of a particular set of input fi bers in controlling or modulating the frequency of Purkinje cell action potential output in the axon hillock. The Purkinje cell is subjected to local inhibitory control by stellate cell synapses targeted to specifi c dendritic compartments, and to global inhibitory control of axonal output by basket cell synapses on the axonal initial segment.A different instructive example of the role of active dendritic properties is found in the medium spiny cell of the neostriatum With synchronous specifi c inputs, larger summated EPSPs depolarize the dendritic membrane strongly. The dendritic membrane contains inwardly rectifying channels Active properties of the apical dendrite of hippocampal pyramidal neurons have been documented amply by patch recordings At the simplest level, the output pattern of a neuron depends on its dendritic properties and their interaction with the soma. This is exemplifi ed by the generation of a burst response in a pyramidal neuron. EPSPs spread through the dendrite, activating fast Na  and then high-threshold Ca 2 channels that give a subthreshold boost to the EPSP. The enhanced EPSP spreads to the soma-axon hillock, triggering a Na  action potential. This propagates into the axon and also back-propagates into the dendrites, eliciting a slower all-or-nothing Ca 2 action potential. This largeamplitude, slow depolarization then spreads through the dendrites and back to the soma, triggering a train of action potentials that form a burst response.This sequence of events is simulated most accurately by a realistic multicompartmental model of the dendritic tree. However, the essence can be contained in a two-compartment model representing the soma and dendritic compartments This simpler model would argue that the specifi c form of the input-output transformation does not depend on a specifi c distribution of active channels in the dendritic tree. Na  and Ca 2 channels in fact are distributed widely in pyramidal neuron dendrites. In computational simulations, grouping channels in different distributions may have little effect on the inputoutput functions of a neuron These are only a few examples of the range of operations carried out by complex dendrites. These dendritic operations are embedded in the circuits that control behavior. Thus, for each neuron, the dendritic tree constitutes an expanded unit essential to the circuits underlying behavior.Much of the complex processing that takes place in dendrites involves inputs through dendritic spines, the tiny outcroppings from the dendritic surface. Their electrotonic properties were described in relation to One of the most fertile hypotheses, by Computational models have been very useful in testing these hypotheses, as well as suggesting other possible functions, such as the dynamic changes of electrotonic structure in medium spiny cells of the basal ganglia. With the development of more powerful light microscopic methods, such as two-photon laser confocal microscopy, it has become possible to test these hypotheses directly by imaging Ca 2 fl uxes in individual spines in relation to synaptic inputs and neuronal activity Evidence for active properties of dendrites has suggested that the spines may also have active properties. Thus, spines may be devices for nonlinear thresholding operations, either through voltage-gated ion channels The range of functions that have been hypothesized for spines is partly a refl ection of how little direct evidence we have of specifi c properties of spines. It also indicates that the answer to the question "What is the function of the dendritic spine" is unlikely to be only one function, but rather a range of functions that is tuned in a given neuron to the specifi c operations of that neuron. The spine is increasingly regarded as a microcompartment that integrates a range of functions with Hodgkin-Huxley-type active kinetics, with intervening passive dendritic membrane. As illustrated in Further computational experiments have shown that spines can function as OR gates or as AND-NOT gates, which together with AND gates, provide the basic operations for a digital computer. This shows that simple logic operations are inherent in dendrites, a starting point for investigating the actual kinds of information processing that the brain uses.In addition to these functions underlying normal functioning of dendrites, the morphological characteristics of a spine may be used to isolate functional properties that result from pathological processes. One such suggestion is that spines may function as compartments to isolate changes at the synapse, such as infl ux Dendrites are the primary information processing substrate of the neuron. They allow the neuron wide fl exibility in carrying out the operations needed for processing information in the spatial and temporal domains within nervous centers. The main constraints on these operations are the rules of passive electrotonic spread, and the rules of nonlinear thresholding at multiple sites within the complex geometry of dendritic trees. Many specifi c types of information processing can be demonstrated in dendrites, such as logic operations, motion detection, oscillatory activity, lateral inhibition, and network control of sensory processing and motor control. These types are possible for both cells without axons and cells with axons, the latter operating in addition within constraints that govern  Spines add a dimension of local computation to dendritic function that is especially relevant to mechanisms for learning and memory. Although spines seem to distance synaptic responses from directly affecting axonal output, many cells demonstrate that distal spine inputs carry specifi c information.The key to understanding how all parts of the dendritic tree, including its distal branches and spines, can participate in mediating specifi c types of information processing is to recognize the tree as a complex system of active nodes. From this perspective, if a spine can affect its neighbor, and that spine has its neighbor, a dendritic tree becomes a cascade of decision points, with multiple cascades operating over multiple overlapping time scales The global output becomes the summation of all the logic operations taking place in the dendrites CBF is approximately 57 ml per 100 g of brain weight per minute, and the calculated glucose utilization by the brain is 31 mmol per 100 g of brain weight per minute, as determined with the A-V difference method In particular circumstances, substrates other than glucose can be utilized by the brain. For example, breastfed neonates have the capacity to utilize the ketone bodies acetoacetate and d-3-hydroxybutyrate, in addition to glucose, as energy substrates for the brain. This capacity is an interesting example of a developmentally regulated adaptive mechanism because maternal milk is highly enriched in lipids, resulting in a lipid-to-carbohydrate ratio much higher than that present in postweaning nutrients. Indeed, lipids account for approximately 55% of the total calories contained in human milk, in contrast with 30 to 35% for a balanced postweaning diet. In addition to the ketone bodies AcAc and 3-HB, other products of lipid metabolism, relevant to brain metabolic processes, are free fatty acids. Acetoacetate, 3-HB, and free fatty acids can all be processed to acetylCoA, thus providing ATP through the TCA cycle Another consideration regarding the lipid-rich diet provided during the suckling period relates to its contribution to the process of myelination. The question is whether the polar lipids and cholesterol that make up myelin are derived from dietary sources or are synthesized within the brain. Evidence shows that brain lipids can be synthesized from blood-borne precursors such as ketone bodies. In addition, when suckling rats are fed a diet low in ketones, carbon atoms for lipogenesis can also be provided by glucose. To summarize, ketone bodies and AcAc are energy substrates, as well as precursors for lipogenesis during the suckling period however, the developing brain appears to be metabolically quite fl exible because glucose, in addition to its energetic function, can be metabolized to generate substrates for lipid synthesis.Starvation and diabetes are two situations in which the availability of glucose to tissues is inadequate and in which plasma ketone bodies are elevated because of enhanced lipid catabolism. Under these conditions, the adaptive mechanisms described for breast-fed neonates become operative in the brain, allowing it to utilize AcAc or 3-HB as energy substrates.A number of metabolic intermediates have been tested as alternative substrates to glucose for brain energy metabolism. Among the numerous molecules tested, mannose is the only one that can sustain normal brain function in the absence of glucose. Mannose crosses the blood-brain barrier readily and, in two enzymatic steps, is converted into fructose 6-phosphate, an intermediate of the glycolytic pathway Lactate and pyruvate can be sources of insight into the intrinsic properties of isolated brain tissue versus those of the brain as an organ receiving substrates from the circulation. Lactate and pyruvate can sustain the synaptic activity of isolated brain preparations, usually thin slices, maintained in vitro in a physiological medium lacking glucose Glucose is the obligatory energy substrate for brain, and it is almost entirely oxidized to CO 2 and H 2 O. This simple statement summarizes, with few exceptions, over four decades of careful studies of brain energy metabolism at organ and regional levels. Under ketogenic conditions, such as starvation and diabetes and during breastfeeding, ketone bodies may provide an energy source for the brain. Lactate and pyruvate, formed from glucose within the brain parenchyma, are adequate energy substrates as well.A striking characteristic of the brain is its high degree of structural and functional specialization. Thus, when we move an arm, motor areas and their related pathways are activated selectively intuitively, one can predict that as "brain work" increases locally, the energy requirements of the activated regions will increase in a temporally and spatially coordinated manner. Because energy substrates are provided through the circulation, blood fl ow should increase in the modality-specifi c activated area. More than a century ago, the British neurophysiologist Charles Sherrington showed, in experimental animals, increases in blood fl ow localized to the parietal cortex in response to sensory stimulation Since Sherringtons seminal work, the search for the identifi cation of chemical mediators that can couple neuronal activity with local increases in blood fl ow has been intense. These signals can be broadly grouped into two categories: molecules or ions that transiently accumulate in the extracellular space after neuronal activity and specifi c neurotransmitters that mediate the coupling in anticipation or at least in parallel with local activation. The increases in extracellular K  , adenosine, and lactate and the related changes in pH are all a consequence of increased neuronal activity, and all have been considered mediators of neuro-vascular coupling because of their vasoactive effects An attractive addition to the list of potential mediators for coupling neuronal activity to blood fl ow is nitric oxide. Indeed, NO is an ideal candidate it is formed locally by neurons and glial cells under the action of a variety of neurotransmitters likely to be released by depolarized afferents to an activated brain area. Nitric oxide is a diffusible and potent vasodilator whose short half-life spatially and temporally restricts its domain of action. However, in several experimental models in which the activity of NO synthase, the enzyme responsible for NO synthesis, was inhibited, a certain degree of coupling was still observed, indicating that NO is probably only one of the regulators of local blood fl ow acting in synergy with others Recent in vitro and in vivo experiments have provided evidence that astrocytes may play a key role in neurovascular coupling. Indeed as will be elaborated in greater detail in the section devoted to neurometabolic coupling In summary, several products of activitydependent neuronal and glial metabolism such as lactate, H, adenosine, prostanoids, and K  have vasoactive effects and are therefore putative mediators of coupling, although the kinetics and spatial resolution of this mode do not account for all the observed phenomena. As attractive as it is, an exclusively neurogenic mode of coupling neuronal activity to blood fl ow is unlikely and, moreover, still awaits fi rm functional confi rmation in vivo. Nitric oxide is undoubtedly a key element in coupling, particularly in view of the fact that glutamate, the principal excitatory neurotransmitter, triggers a receptor-mediated NO formation in neurons and glia this is consistent with the view that whenever a functionally defi ned brain area is activated and glutamate is released by the depolarized afferents, NO may be formed, thus providing a direct mechanism contributing to the coupling between activity and local increases in blood fl ow. Astrocytes appear to function as intermediary processor in neurovascular coupling Through the activity-linked increase in blood fl ow, more substrates-namely, glucose and oxygen-necessary to meet the additional energy demands are delivered to the activated area per unit time. The cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in oxygen consumption and glucose utilization are treated in a later section.Modern functional brain-imaging techniques enable the in vivo monitoring of human blood fl ow and the two indices of energy metabolism: glucose utilization and oxygen consumption For studies in laboratory animals, tracer amounts of radioactive 2-DG are injected intravenously the animal is subjected to the behavioral paradigms of interest and sacrifi ced at the end of the experiment. Serial thin sections of the brain are prepared and processed for autoradiography. This autoradiographic method provides, after appropriate corrections, an accurate measurement of LCMRglu with a spatial resolution of approximately 50-100 mm. Using this method, researchers have determined LCMRglu in virtually all structurally and functionally defi ned brain structures in various physiological and pathological states, including sleep, seizures, and dehydration, and after a variety of pharmacological treatments In humans, LCMRglu determined by PET with the use of 18 F-2-DG is approximately 50% lower than that in rodents, and physiological activation of specifi c modalities increases LCMRglu in discrete areas of the brain that can be visualized with a spatial resolution of a few millimeters. For example, visual stimulations presented to subjects as checkerboard patterns reversing at frequencies ranging from 2 to 10 Hz selectively increase LCMRglu in the primary visual cortex and a few connected cortical areas. With the use of this stimulation paradigm, the combined PET analysis of local cerebral blood fl ow and local oxygen consumption, in addition to LCMRglu, has revealed a unique and unexpected feature of human brain energy metabolism regulation. The canonical view was that the three metabolic parameters were tightly coupled, implying that if, for example, CBF increased locally during physiological activation, LCMRglu and LCMRO 2 would increase in parallel. In what is now referred to as the phenomenon of "uncoupling," physiological stimulation of the visual system increases LCBF and LCMRglu in the primary visual cortex without a commensurate increase in LCMRO 2 A glance at the metabolic pathways reveals that if glucose does not enter the TCA cycle to be oxidized, then lactate will be produced. Lactate, like several other metabolically relevant molecules, can be determined with the technique of magnetic resonance imaging spectroscopy for 1 H, which provides a means of unequivocally identifying in living tissues the presence of molecules that bear the naturally occurring isotope 1 H. Consistent with the prediction that if during activation glucose is predominantly processed glycolytically, then lactate should be produced locally in the activated region, a transient increase in the lactate signal is detected with 1 H MRI spectroscopy in the human primary visual cortex during appropriate visual stimulation Studies at the whole organ level, based on the A-V differences of metabolic substrates, have revealed a great deal about the global energy metabolism of the brain. They have indicated that, under normal conditions, glucose is virtually the sole energy substrate for the brain and that it is entirely oxidized. New techniques that allow imaging of the three fundamental parameters of brain energy metabolism-namely, blood fl ow, oxygen consumption, and glucose utilization-provide a more refi ned level of spatial resolutionKrebs cycle .4 Structure and metabolism of glucose and 2-deoxyglucose. 2-DG is transported into cells through glucose transporters and phosphorylated by hexokinase to glucose 6-phosphate without signifi cant further processing or dephosphorylation back to glucose. Therefore, when labeled radioactively, 2-DG used in tracer concentrations is a valuable marker of glucose uptake and phosphorylation, which directly indicates glucose utilization.and demonstrate that brain energy metabolism is regionally heterogeneous and is coupled tightly to the functional activation of specifi c neuronal pathways .What are the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie the regulation of brain energy metabolism revealed by the foregoing studies at global and regional levels In particular, what are the metabolic events taking place in the cell types that make up the brain parenchyma How is it possible to reconcile whole organ studies indicating complete oxidation of glucose with transient activation-induced glycolysis at the regional level These and other related questions will be addressed here and in the next sections.Before we move on to an analysis of the cell-specifi c mechanisms of brain energy metabolism, it seems appropriate to briefl y review some basic aspects of the energy balance of the brain. Because glucose, in normal circumstances, is the main energy substrate of the brain, the overview will be restricted to its metabolic pathways. Glucose metabolism in the brain is similar to that in other tissues and includes three principal metabolic pathways: glycolysis, the tri-carboxylic acid cycle, and the pentose phosphate pathway. Because of the global similarities with other tissues, these pathways are simply summarized in Glycolysis is the metabolism of glucose to pyruvate Under aerobic conditions, pyruvate is oxidatively decarboxylated to yield acetyl-CoA in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase. Acetyl-coenzyme A condenses with oxaloacetate to produce citrate Although glycolysis, the TCA cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation are coordinated pathways that produce ATP, using glucose as a fuel, ATP is not the only form of metabolic energy. Indeed, for several biosynthetic reactions in which the precursors are in a more oxidated state than the products, metabolic energy in the form of reducing power is needed in addition to ATP. This is the case for the reductive synthesis of free fatty acids from acetyl-CoA, which are components of myelin and of other structural elements of neural cells, such as the plasma membrane. In cells of the brain, as in other organs, the reducing power is provided by the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. The processing of glucose through the pentose phosphate pathway produces NADPH. The fi rst reaction in the pentose phosphate pathway is the conversion of glucose 6-phosphate into ribulose 5-phosphate In addition to reductive biosynthesis, NADPH is needed for the scavenging of reactive oxygen species. The superoxide radical anion, hydrogen peroxide, and the hydroxy radical are three ROS, generated by the transfer of single electrons to molecular oxygen as by-products of several physiological cellular processes. A considerable contribution to the generation of ROS is the oxidative metabolism of glucose taking place in the mitochondrial electron transfer chain associated with oxidative phosphoryl ation. Other ROS-generating reactions include the activities of monoamine oxidase, tyrosine hydroxylase, nitric oxide synthase, and the eicosanoid-forming enzymes lipoxygenases and cyclooxygenases. Reactive oxygen species are highly damaging to cells because they can cause DNA disruption and mutations, as well as activation of enzymatic cascades, including proteases and lipases that can eventually lead to cell death.Thus, oxidative metabolism, which is so essential to cell viability by generating large amounts of the cellular fuel ATP, implies as a by-product a potentially harmful activity such as ROS generation. The coordinated activity of two molecules is essential in protecting cells against ROS-mediated damage, or oxidative stress: NADPH and glutathione. As we have seen, NADPH is produced through a particular arm of glucose metabolism, the pentose phosphate pathway. Interestingly, therefore, glucose metabolism provides two forms of energy, high energy phosphates such as ATP and reducing power such as NADH, the latter contributing to the neutralization of ROS, the harmful by-products of the process which produces the former. It is, however, through its combined action with glutathione that NADPH contributes to ROS scavenging. Scavenging of ROS is ensured by the sequential action of superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase The metabolism of glutathione is tightly regulated and implies yet another example of neuron-astrocyte cooperation. Glutathione is a tripeptide synthesized through the concerted action of two enzymes, gammaGluCys synthase, which combines glutamate and cysteine to yield the dipeptide gammaGlu Cys, and glutathione synthase, which adds a glycine to the dipeptide to yield GSH The glutathione content and reducing potential are considerably higher in astrocytes compared to neurons this fact, combined with the much higher oxidative activity of neurons vs. astrocytes, makes neurons more vulnerable to oxidative stress as well as highly dependent on astrocytes for their protection Several neurodegenerative disorders appear to involve a dysfunction in the ability of neural cells to control oxidative stress. For example, a familial form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is due to a SOD mutation evidence for a decrease in GSH content in the substantia nigra has been described in Parkinsons disease A well-characterized neuropsychiatric disorder, the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, is caused by transketolase hypoactivity. The Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is characterized by a severe impairment of memory and of other cognitive processes accompanied by balance and gait dysfunction and by paralysis of oculomotor muscles. The syndrome is due to a lack of thiamine in the diet it affects only susceptible persons who are also alcoholics or chronically undernourished. Thiamine pyrophosphate is a thiamine-containing cofactor essential for the activity of transketolase. In patients with the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, thiamine pyrophosphate binds 10 times less avidly to transketolase compared with the enzyme of normal persons. This enzymatic dysfunction renders patients with the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome much more vulnerable to thiamine defi ciency. This syndrome illustrates how an anomaly in a discrete metabolic pathway of energy metabolism may result in severe alterations in behavior and motor function.The main energy-consuming process of the brain is the maintenance of ionic gradients across the plasma membrane, a condition that is crucial for excitability. Maintenance of these gradients is achieved predominantly through the activity of ionic pumps fueled by ATP, particularly Na  , K  -ATPase, localized in neurons as well as in other cell types such as glia. Activity of these pumps accounts for approximately 50% of basal glucose oxidation in the nervous system. Very recently theoretical calculations of the cost of synaptic transmission have been provided by caution they nevertheless provide a valuable framework for further experimental studies on brains energy budget. The energy budget of an average glutamatergic pyramidal neuron fi ring at 4 Hz was estimated, with the assumption that 80% of cortical neurons are pyramidal cells and that 90% of the synapses release glutamate. First, the cost of the recycling of released glutamate via reuptake and metabolism in astrocytes and the restoration of the postsynaptic ion gradient has been estimated. Glutamate recycling requires 2.67 ATPglutamate molecule since one vesicle contains 4  10 3 molecules of glutamate, the cost of transmitter recycling is 1.1  10 4 ATPvesicle. The restoration of postsynaptic ionic gradients disrupted by the activity of NMDA and non-NMDA receptors is 1.4  10 5 ATPvesicle, giving a total of 1.51  10 5 ATPvesicle. By estimating the total number of synapses formed by a single pyramidal neuron at 8  10 3 and a fi ring rate of 4 Hz, the fi gure of 3.2  10 8 ATPaction potentialneuron is obtained. Contrary to previous estimates based on the measurement of heat production in peripheral unmyelinated nerves, the cost of action potential propagation is rather elevated. Thus by considering that an action potential actively depolarizes the cell body and axons by 100 mV and passively the dendrites by 50 mV, the calculation yields a value of 3.8  10 8 ATPneuron. This calculation is based on the estimate of the minimal Na  infl ux required to depolarize the cell In addition to the maintenance of ionic gradients that are disrupted during activity, other energy-consuming processes exist in neurons. Thus, the permanent synthesis of molecules needed for communications, such as neurotransmitters, or for general cellular purposes consumes energy. Axonal transport of molecules synthesized in the nucleus to their fi nal destination along the axon or at the axon terminal is yet another process fueled by cellular energy metabolism.Exactly as in other tissues, the metabolism of glucose, the main energy substrate of the brain, produces two forms of energy: ATP and NADPH. Glycolysis and the TCA cycle produce ATP, whereas energy in the form of reducing equivalents stored in the NADPH molecule is produced predominantly through the pentose phosphate pathway. Reduced glutathione provides a major defense against oxidative stress. Maintenance of the electrochemical gradients, particularly for Na  and K  , needed for electrical signaling via the action potential and for chemical signaling through synaptic transmission is the main energy-consuming process of neural cells. Neurons exist in a variety of sizes and shapes and express a large spectrum of fi ring properties. These differences are likely to imply specifi c energy demands for example, large pyramidal cells in the primary motor cortex, which must maintain energyconsuming processes such as ion pumping over a large membrane surface or axonal transport along several centimeters, have considerably larger energy requirements than local interneurons. However, it is now clear that other cell types of the nervous system-glia and vascular endothelial cells-not only consume energy but also play a crucial role in the fl ux of energy substrates to neurons. Arguments for such an active role for nonneuronal cells-in particular, glia-are both quantitative and qualitative. Glial cells make up approximately half the brain volume. A conservative fi gure is a 1 : 1 ratio between the number of astrocytes, one of the predominant glial cell types, and neurons. Higher ratios have been described, depending on the regions, developmental ages, or species. Indeed, the astrocyte-to-neuron ratio increases with the size of the brain and is thus high in humans. It is therefore clear that glucose reaching the brain parenchyma provides energy substrates to a variety of cell types, only some of which are neurons.Even more compelling for the realization of the key role that astrocytes play in providing energy substrates to active neurons are the cytological relations that exist among brain capillaries, astrocytes, and neurons. These relations, which are illustrated in Given the high degree of cellular heterogeneity of the brain, understanding the relative role played by each cell type in the fl ux of energy substrates has depended largely on the availability of purifi ed preparations, such as primary cultures enriched in neurons, astrocytes, or vascular endothelial cells. Such preparations have some drawbacks because they may not nec-FIGURE 13.8 Schematic representation of cytological relations existing among intraparenchymal capillaries, astrocytes, and the neuropil. Astrocyte processes surround capillaries and ensheathe synapses in addition, receptors and uptake sites for neurotransmitters are present on astrocytes. These features make astrocytes ideally suited to sense synaptic activity and to couple it with uptake and metabolism of energy substrates originating from the circulation. essarily express all the properties of the cells in situ. In addition, one of the parameters of energy metabolism in vivo-namely, blood fl ow-cannot be examined in cultures. Despite these limitations, in vitro studies in primary cultures have proved very useful in identifying the cellular sites of glucose uptake and its subsequent metabolic fate, particularly, glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, thus providing illuminating correlations of two parameters of brain energy metabolism that are monitored in vivo: glucose utilization and oxygen consumption.Glucose is a highly hydrophilic molecule that enters cells through a facilitated transport mediated by specifi c transporters. Twelve genes, encoding glucose transporter proteins, have been identifi ed and cloned so far these are designated GLUT1 to GLUT12 Two isoforms of GLUT1 with molecular masses of 55 and 45 kDa, respectively, are detected in the brain, depending on their degree of glycosylation. The 55-kDa form of GLUT1 essentially is localized in brain microvessels, choroid plexus, and ependymal cells. In microvessels, the distribution of GLUT1 is asymmetric, with a higher density on the ablumenal side than on the vascular side. An intracellular pool of GLUT1 also has been identifi ed in vascular endothelial cells. In the brain in situ, the 45-kDa form of GLUT1 is localized predominantly in astrocytes. Under culture conditions, all neural cells, including neurons and other glial cells, express GLUT1 however, this phenomenon appears to be due to the capacity of GLUT1 to be induced by cellular stress.The glucose transporter specifi c to neurons is GLUT3. Its cellular distribution appears to predominate in the neuropil. This distrubution contrasts with that of GLUT 4 and 8, which appears to predominate on the cell body and proximal dendrites.GLUT5 is localized to microglial cells, the resident macrophages of the brain, taking part in the immune and infl ammatory responses of the nervous system. In peripheral tissues, particularly in the small intestine, GLUT5 functions as a transporter for fructose, whose concentrations are very low in the brain. In the nervous system, therefore, GLUT5 may have diverse transport functions.Another glucose transporter, GLUT2, has been localized selectively in astrocytes of discrete brain areas, such as certain hypothalamic and brain stem nuclei, which participate in the regulation of feeding behavior and in the central control of insulin release.It is clear that glucose uptake into the brain parenchyma is a highly specifi ed process regulated in a cell-specifi c manner by glucose transporter subtypes. As we have seen, glucose utilization can be assessed with radioactively labeled 2-DG. To determine the cellular site of basal and activity-related glucose utilization, this technique has been applied to homogeneous cultures of astrocytes or neurons. For quantitative purposes and to allow comparisons with in vivo studies, these in vitro experiments, in which radioactive 2-DG is used as a tracer, must be conducted in a medium containing a concentration of glucose near that measured in vivo in the extracellular space of the brain. The basal rate of glucose utilization is higher in astrocytes than in neurons, with values of about 20 and 6 nmol per milligram of protein per minute, respectively . These values are of the same order as those determined in vivo for cortical gray matter with the 2-DG autoradiographic technique. In view of this difference and of the quantitative preponderance of astrocytes compared with neurons in the gray matter, these data reveal a signifi cant contribution by astrocytes to basal glucose utilization as determined by 2-DG autoradiography or PET in vivo. Recent high-resolution microautoradiographic imaging ex vivo has indicated an approximately even distribution of 2-DG in neurons and astrocytes The contribution of astrocytes to glucose utilization during activation appears to be even more striking. In vitro, activation can be mimicked by exposure of the cells to glutamate, the principal excitatory neurotransmitter, because, during activation of a given cortical area, the concentration of glutamate in the extracellular space increases considerably due to its release from the axon terminals of activated pathways. As shown in The glutamate-stimulated uptake of glucose by astrocytes is a source of insight into the cellular bases of the activation-induced local increase in glucose utilization visualized with 18 F-2-DG PET in vivo. As we have seen, focal physiological activation of specifi c brain areas is accompanied by increases in glucose utilization because glutamate is released from excitatory synapses when neuronal pathways subserving specifi c modalities are activated, the stimulation by glutamate of glucose utilization in astrocytes provides a direct mechanism for coupling neuronal activity to glucose utilization in the brain In this context, we should note that, in vivo, the main mechanism that accounts for activation-induced 2-DG uptake is the activity of Na  , K  -ATPase. It is important here to briefl y consider the relative participation of the neuronal and astrocytic Na  , K  -ATPases in glucose utilization. When glutamate is released from depolarized neuronal terminals, it is taken up predominantly into astrocytes. The stoichiometry of glutamate reuptake being one molecule of glutamate cotransported with three Na  ions, the increase in intracellular astrocytic Na  concentration associated with glutamate reuptake massively activates the pump. Thus, although the tonic activity of the Na  , K  -ATPase is needed to maintain the transmembrane neuronal and glial ionic gradients and accounts for basal glucose utilization, on a short-term temporal scale, when glutamate is released from depolarized axon terminals of modality-specifi c afferents, the astrocytic Na  , K  -ATPase is briskly activated, due to the massive increase in intracellular Na  associated with glutamate reuptake, providing the signal for the activationdependent glucose utilization. Increases of glutamate as small as 10 mM are suffi cient to double the activity of Na  , K  -ATPase.How does activation of Na  , K  -ATPase cause increased glucose utilization The mechanism was explained by pioneering studies on erythrocytes by Joseph Hoffmann and colleagues at Yale University, which have been confi rmed in a number of other cell systems, including brain and vascular smooth muscle. The increase in pump activity consumes ATP A compartmentalization of glucose uptake during activation also has been unequivocably found by Marco Tsacopoulos and colleagues in the honeybee drone retina The fact that the increase in glucose uptake during activation can be ascribed predominantly, if not exclusively, to astrocytes indicates that energy substrates must be released by astrocytes to meet the energy demands of neurons. As indicated earlier, lactate and pyruvate are adequate substrates for brain tissue in vitro Thus, a metabolic compartmentation whereby glucose taken up by astrocytes and metabolized glycolytically to lactate is then released in the extracellular space to be utilized by neurons is consistent with biochemical and electrophysiological observations Studies of the well-compartmentalized honeybee drone retina and of isolated preparations of guinea pig retina containing photoreceptors attached to Mueller cells corroborate the existence of such metabolic fl uxes between glia and neurons. In addition to the glial localization of glucose uptake during activation, glycolytic products have been shown to be released. In particular, during activation, glial cells in the honeybee drone retina release alanine produced from pyruvate by transamination the released alanine is taken up by photoreceptor neurons and, after reconversion into pyruvate, can enter the TCA cycle to yield ATP through oxidative phosphorylation Although plasma lactate, except under particular conditions such as vigorous exercise, contributes only marginally as a metabolic substrate for the brain, lactate formed within the brain parenchyma can fulfi ll the energetic needs of neurons. Lactate, after conversion into pyruvate by a reaction catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase, can provide, on a molar basis, 15-18 ATP through oxidative phosphorylation. Conversion of lactate into pyruvate does not require ATP, and, in this regard, lactate is energetically more favorable than the fi rst obligatory step of glycolysis in which glucose is phosphorylated to glucose 6-phosphate at the expense of one molecule of ATP Glycogen is the single largest energy reserve of the brain Glycogen turnover in the brain is extremely rapid, and glycogen levels are fi nely coordinated with synaptic activity In addition to glycogen, glucose is incorporated into other macromolecules such as proteins and lipids at rates specifi c for the turnover of each macromolecule, which can span from a few minutes to a few days.Glycogen levels in astrocytes are tightly regulated by various neurotransmitters. Several monoamine neurotransmitters-namely, noradrenaline, serotonin, and histamine-are glycogenolytic in the brain, in addition to certain peptides, such as vasoactive intestinal peptide and pituitary adenylate cyclase activating peptide, and adenosine and ATP These observations show that neuronal signals can exert receptormediated metabolic effects on astrocytes in a manner similar to peripheral hormones on their target cells. However, the action of this type of neurotransmitter is temporally specifi ed and spatially restricted to activated areas. Indeed, brain glycogenolysis visualized by autoradiography in laboratory animals also has been demonstrated in vivo after physiological activation of a modalityspecifi c pathway Under basal conditions, glucose uptake and metabolism occur in every brain cell type. Glucose uptake is mediated by specifi c transporters that are distributed in a cell-specifi c manner. Astrocytes play a critical role in the utilization of glucose coupled to excitatory synaptic transmission. The molecular mechanisms of this coupling are stoichiometrically directed: for each synaptically released glutamate molecule taken up with three Na  ions by an astrocyte, one glucose molecule enters the same astrocyte, two ATP molecules are produced through glycolysis, and two lactate molecules are released and consumed by neurons to yield 15-18 ATPs through oxidative phosphorylation. Neuronal signals can exert receptor-mediated glycogenolysis in astrocytes in a manner similar to peripheral hormones on their target cells. However, this type of effect by neurotransmitters is temporally specifi ed and spatially restricted within activated areas, possibly to provide additional energy substrates in register with local increases in neuronal activity.As has been shown, synaptically released glutamate is removed rapidly from the extracellular space by a transporter-mediated reuptake system that is particularly effi cient in astrocytes One may wonder how astrocytes dispose of the glutamate that they take up, because, unlike carbohydrates or lipids, amino acids cannot be stored. The predominant pathway in peripheral tissues for disposing of amino acids is the transfer of their a amino group to a corresponding a-keto acid this reaction is catalyzed by aminotransferases Hepatic encephalopathy is observed in patients with severe liver failure. The disease can be in one of two forms: an acute form, called fulminant hepatic failure, and a chronic form, portosystemic encephalopathy. The neuropsychiatric symptoms of fulminant hepatic failure are delirium, coma, and seizures associated with acute toxic or viral hepatic failure. Patients having portosystemic encephalopathy may present personality changes, episodic confusion, or stupor and, in the most severe cases, coma. The current view on the pathophysiology of hepatic encephalopathy is that, due to liver failure, "toxic" substances that affect brain function accumulate in the circulation.One of the substances thought to be responsible for neuropsychiatric "toxicity" is ammonia. The neuropathological fi ndings are rather striking: astrocytes are the brain cells that appear principally affected. In the acute form, astrocyte swelling is prominent and likely to be the cause of the observed acute brain edema. In portosystemic encephalopathy, astrocytes adopt morphological features characteristic of what is defi ned as an Alzheimer type II astrocyte: in these cells, the nucleus is pale and enlarged, chromatin is marginated, and a prominent nucleolus often is observed. Lipofuscin deposits may be present, and the amount of the astrocyte-specifi c protein glial fi brillary acidic protein is decreased. Neurons appear structurally normal. All the foregoing histopathological changes have been reproduced in vitro by acutely or chronically applying ammonium chloride to primary astrocyte cultures. As mentioned earlier, detoxifi cation of ammonium is an ATP-requiring, astrocyte-specifi c reaction catalyzed by glutamine synthase In summary, though the precise pathophysiological mechanisms of the neuropsychiatric syndrome in hepatic encephalopathy are still unknown, this clinical condition provides a striking illustration of the fundamental importance of neuron-astrocyte metabolic interactions because structural and functional alterations apparently restricted to astrocytes result in severe behavioral perturbations. Astrocyte Capillary However, not all glutamate is regenerated through the glutamate-glutamine shuttle because some of the glutamate released by neurons enters at the a-KG level, the TCA cycle in astrocytes therefore, de novo synthesis is required to maintain the neuronal glutamate pool. Glutamate can be synthesized through NADPH-dependent reductive amination of a-KG catalyzed by GDH Finally, another potential pathway described by Arne Schousboe and colleagues exists for the de novo synthesis of glutamate in neurons from substrates provided by astrocytes. With the use of uniformly labeled 13 C compounds in combination with magnetic resonance spectroscopy, astrocytes have been shown to release signifi cant amounts of alanine and a-KG. Both metabolic intermediates are taken up by neurons and can be converted into glutamate and pyruvate in a transamination reaction catalyzed by Note that because a-KG is used for glutamate synthesis, metabolic intermediates downstream of a-KG must be available to maintain a sustained fl ux through the TCA cycle in astrocytes As noted earlier, the metabolic intermediate a-KG lies at the branching point of glucose and glutamate metabolism A key function of astrocytes is to remove synaptically released glutamate. A large proportion of glutamate is transformed to glutamine through an energy-requiring process that also allows for the detoxifi cation of ammonium. Glutamine released by astrocytes regenerates the neuronal glutamate pool. Some of the glutamate also is regenerated from lactate and through fi xation of the amino group of leucine onto the TCA intermediate a-KG, providing another indication of the tight link existing between glutamate FIGURE 13.13 Metabolic intermediates are released by astrocytes to regenerate the glutamate neurotransmitter pool in neurons. Glutamine, formed from glutamate in a reaction catalyzed by glutamine synthase, is released by astrocytes and taken up by neurons, which convert it into glutamate under the action of glutaminase. GS is an enzyme selectively localized in astrocytes. This metabolic cycle is referred to as the glutamate-glutamine shuttle. Other quantitatively less important sources of neuronal glutamate are lactate, alanine, and a-ketoglutarate. In astrocytes, glutamate is synthesized de novo from a-KG in a reaction catalyzed by glutamate dehydrogenase. The carbon backbone of glutamate is exported by astrocytes after conversion into glutamine under the action of GS the conversion of leucine into a-ketoisocaproate, catalyzed by leucine transaminase, provides the amino group for the synthesis of glutamine from glutamate. Carbons "lost" from the TCA cycle as a-KG is converted into glutamate are replenished by oxaloacetate formed from pyruvate in a reaction catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase, another astrocyte-specifi c enzyme.and nitrogen metabolism and of the crucial function that astrocytes play in maintaining the neuronal glutamate pool at levels that ensure the maintenance of synaptic transmission.From a strictly energetic viewpoint, the brain can be seen as an almost exclusive glucose-processing machine producing H 2 O and CO 2 . However, the metabolism of glucose in the brain is specifi ed temporally, spatially, and functionally. Thus, glucose metabolism increases with exquisite spatiotemporal precision in register with neuronal activity. The site of this increase is not the neuronal cell body rather, it is the neuropil, where presynaptic terminals, postsynaptic elements, and astrocytes ensheathing synaptic contacts are localized In conclusion, the axon terminal of glutamatergic neurons, which are the main communication lines in the nervous system, and the astrocytic processes that surround them should be viewed as a metabolic unit in which the neuron furnishes the activation signal to the astrocyte and the astrocyte provides not only the precursors needed to maintain the neurotransmitter pool, but also the energy substrate This chapter covers some of the key events that take place in the early stages of development of the vertebrate nervous system, a period during which structures such as the neural tube, placodes, and neural crest are formed, setting in place the foundations on which a functioning nervous system is subsequently built. The fi rst part of the chapter describes how these embryonic structures fi rst are specifi ed by inductive tissue interactions and how they form by the process of morphogenesis. The second part of the chapter describes the extensive early developmental events required for regionalizing the nervous system along its different axes. Regionalization requires the complex processes of neural patterning that endow neural precursor cells with the ability to give rise to correct types of neuron in appropriate locations in the adult nervous system. These processes are gradual, continuous, and begin when neural tissue fi rst forms. We describe some of the processes underlying neural patterning, beginning with how polarity along each of the neuraxes is fi rst established, and progressing to more fi ne levels of regional organization.The progenitor cells that form the vertebrate nervous system can be traced back in development to an epithelial cell layer, called the ectoderm, that covers the outside of the embryo during gastrulation In the 1930s, Mangold and Spemann discovered neural induction during experiments in which they transplanted small pieces of tissues from one amphibian embryo to another at pregastrulae stages. The key observation was made when they transplanted a small piece of tissue from a region called the dorsal blastopore lip, and the host embryo responded to the grafted tissue by forming a complete secondary dorsal axis in the secondary dorsal axes were not derived from the transplanted tissue but rather from the tissue in the host embryo. In particular, the secondary dorsal axis contained a complete nervous system that was derived entirely from the ventral ectoderm of the host embryo, a tissue that would have differentiated into skin in the absence of a graft. The implication of this observation was that the transplanted tissue can act as a source of inducing signals that can cause ventral ectoderm to form neural tissue, and that this inductive interaction normally occurs on the dorsal side of the embryo. Tissue in the DBL was later termed the organizer because of its ability, when transplanted, to reprogram the ventral side of the embryo to form dorsal tissues, not only in the ectoderm but also in the internal mesodermal tissues. Following Mangold and Spemanns lead, it was subsequently found all vertebrate embryos appear to contain a region, called Spemanns organizer, which can induce ectoderm to form neural tissue.Organizer transplantation experiments also gave the fi rst indication that signals produced by Spemanns organizer were responsible for inducing different regions of the CNS. In these experiments, smaller regions of the DBL were used, and taken from embryos at different stages. The DBL of younger embryos contains the fi rst involuting tissue and, when transplanted, induces head structures that contained neural tissue from the anterior portions of the neuraxis. Conversely, the DBL from older embryos involutes later and, when transplanted, induces tail structures that contained neural tissue from just the posterior portions of the neuraxis. The organizer, therefore, can be subdivided into two parts, a head and trunktail organizer, which specify different regions of the CNS along the AP axis. The role of the organizer tissue in the regionalization of the CNS is discussed further in a later section.The molecular nature of the inducers produced by organizer tissue remained elusive until the 1990s, when key biochemical pathways that mediate cell-cell signaling in animal development were identifi ed using the tools of molecular genetics. One such pathway is a subfamily of TGFB-like factors, called the bone morphogenetic proteins, which has proven to be remarkably conserved in action across the animal kingdom, from fl ies to humans ligands, secreted extracellular proteins that bind and activate a small family of heterodimeric cell surface receptors, which in turn transduce a signal by intracellular phosphorylation events that ultimately lead to changes in the activities of transcription factors, the SMAD proteins The current view of neural induction, the default model, stems from experiments using the amphibian Xenopus laevis, mainly because of an assay where the ectoderm can be explanted into culture before gastrulation into a simple salt solution. Ectoderm isolated before gastrulation differentiates into ventral epidermal tissue in culture. However, if BMP signaling is inhibited experimentally in these ectodermal explants, epidermal differentiation is suppressed, and neural tissue forms instead, presumably as a default pathway. The converse result can also be obtained using the fact that when isolated ectodermal cells are dissociated into single cells, they form nerve cells. However, if BMP4 is added to these cells, they revert back to epidermis. These early experiments were instrumental in showing that BMPs are potent epidermalizing agents and that blocking BMP signaling was suffi cient to induce the ectoderm to form neural tissue as a default pathway. The ventral ectoderm of Xenopus and other vertebrate embryos was subsequently shown to express several BMPs ligands, consistent with their epidermalizing effects The default model gained further support from the discovery that Spemanns organizer is a rich source of BMP antagonists one the BMP antagonists, chordin or noggin, by knockout mutations have a relatively normal nervous system. However, the full potential of these antagonists has only become apparent when multiple antagonists are removed at the same time, mainly by using an approach where embryos are injected with small, stable oliognucleotides, called morpholinos, which bind to and inhibit the expression of target mRNAs. A complete loss of neural tissue is then observed when all three BMP antagonists, Chordin, Follastatin and Noggin, are simultaneously targeted using morpholinos, both in Xenopus and in Zebrafi sh. Thus, the production of multiple BMP antagonists within Spemanns organizer creates a dorsalizing center on one side of the embryo that inhibits the epidermalizing effects of BMPs produced in a ventralizing center on the other Why does Spemanns organizer express multiple BMP antagonists that apparently compensate for each other, when in principle one would do Spemann coined the phrase "double-assurance" to emphasize the importance of redundancy in developmental mechanism as a way to reliably pattern the early embryo. Redundancy in the BMP pathway, moreover, is used as a mechanism to self-regulate, thus ensuring the appropriate gradient of BMP signaling is established across the DV axis of the ectoderm reliably, time after time While the basic tenets of the default model have stood up over time, the current picture of neural induction has increasingly become more complicated as additional neural inducers have been identifi ed. One of the most important of these is fi broblast growth factor, a ligand that binds to its receptors and signals via the MAP kinase cascade. FGF has been proposed to have several potential roles during neural induction, as a "priming" signal and as an inducer of posterior neural tissue, which forms from a region of the blastula that lie at some distance from the organizer region. How FGF induces neural tissue remains somewhat controversial. One model is that FGF signaling acts by suppressing BMP signaling by targeting Smad1, either directly by phosphorylating a critical linker region, or indirectly by inducing the expression of a protein called SIP1, a zinc-fi nger, homedomain protein, that binds to and represses the transcriptional activity of the Smad proteins. Alternatively, FGF signaling is likely to induce neural tissue independent of its effects on BMP signaling, although the exact details of this mechanism remain unexplored. Currently it remains unclear whether there are other signaling pathways such as FGF that induce neural tissue by novel mechanisms or whether all inducers ultimately act by somehow inhibiting BMP signaling.The default model correctly underscores the importance of inhibiting BMP activity in neural induction, but unfortunately de-emphasizes other changes that are required for neural tissue to form The nervous system fi rst arises in the vertebrate embryo from a region of ectoderm that is induced to form the neuroepithelium of the neural plate and tube rather than differentiating into epidermis. Classical transplantation studies have shown that dorsal ectoderm forms neural tissue in response to signals from the organizer. More recent studies have shown that ventral ectoderm undergoes epidermal differentiation in response to multiple, endogenously produced BMP ligands. Spemanns organizer expresses multiple BMP antagonists that act redundantly to induce neural tissue. This redundancy is the bases for the complex mechanisms of self-regulation ensuring that the BMP signaling pathway is activated stably and correctly along the DV axis. Additional pathways are likely required during neural induction, including ones that establish gene expression required for neural precursor formation.Among the earliest changes that occur during the formation of the vertebrate nervous system are ones associated with morphological changes in cellular and tissue structure. At the cellular level, ectoderm cells lose their cuboidal shape and elongate into the pseudostratifi ed, neuroepithelial cells that characterizes the morphology of neural precursors cells along the entire axis of the embryo. At a tissue level, the neuroepithelium of the neural plate undergoes the complex morphogenetic movements of neurulation to form the neural tube, which invaginates into the embryo, pinches off from the surrounding ectoderm and forms a separate tissue anlage. Neurulation is an exceedingly complex process and prone to failure for multiple reasons. Indeed, a failure to close the neural tube has devastating downstream consequences on neural development and the cause of neural tube defects, a relatively common class of human birth defects.In higher vertebrates, neurulation can be divided into two phases which differ in their morphological movements: a primary phase involving the brain and most of the spinal cord and a secondary phase involving more posterior regions of the spinal cord. While we are still quite far from understanding the complex tissue mechanics that underlie primary neurulation, some progress has been made in breaking down aspects of neurulation into cellular behaviors that occurs within subregions of the neuroepithelium. One of the earliest acting of these is convergent-extension, which occurs during gastrulation and neurulation and extends the neuroepithelium along the AP axis As C-E extends the neural plate along the AP axis, other localized cell behaviors along the DV axis contribute to the buckling of the plate into a tube. A hinge point forms at the midline of the neural plate as well as at more dorsal positions In the next section, we will discuss the various mechanisms that subdivide the neuroepithelium into different regions along the neuraxis during neural patterning. At this point, we emphasize that among the earliest readouts of this patterning are regional differences in morphogenetic behavior. For instance, the neural tube is wider at its amterior end where the brain forms than at the posterior end, which forms the spinal cord. This difference in shape arises in part because C-E is much more pronounced in posterior regions, presumably as a result of early patterning events along the AP axis. Another obvious example is the early steps in eye formation. The eye anlagen are fi rst apparent during neurulation, when the neuroepithelium at the level of the prospective diencephalon evaginates to form the bilaterally paired eye vesicles. At the point where the neural tube and eye vesicle join, the neuroepithelium eventually pinches together to form the optic stalk while the eye vesicle forms a cup and divides further into an inner layer that gives rise to the retina and an outer layer that will form the pigmented epithelium. Again, these regionalized morphogenetic processes are downstream consequences of the early patterning of the neural plate into different regions although how patterning controls morphogenesis remains largely unexplored.Formation of the vertebrate nervous system begins with a series of striking changes in cell and tissue morphology as the ectoderm forms the neural plate and tube. Neural tube formation involves the complex morphogenetic process of neurulation that requires coordinated changes in cell shape, cell division, cell migration, cell death, and cell-cell contacts. One prominent cell behavior during neural plate and tube formation is required for CE, which narrows the neural anlage and extends it along the AP axis. CE requires the PCP pathway to orient cell movement and intercalation behavior. Much remains to be learned, however, about how changes at the molecular, cellular, and tissue level combine to produce the complex morphological changes that occur during neural plate and tube formation.As discussed earlier, the neural plate is a morphologically homogeneous sheet of epithelial cells derived from dorsal ectoderm, which acquires its neural potential and fate as a result of inductive signaling. As the neural plate rolls up and closes into a tube, a series of constrictions appear in its wall, subdividing the anterior end of the tube into a series of vesicles representing the anlagen of fore-, mid-, and hindbrain tion of cells along the medial-lateral axis which extends the neural anlage along the anterior-posterior axis. The polarized cell behaviours that drive this process require the PCP pathway. Neurulation of the neural plate into a tube requires several hinge points along the DV axis, including one at the forming ventral midline which becomes the fl oor plate, as well as more dorsal ones. These hinge points allow the neural plate to buckle and the neural folds to elevate and fuse at the dorsal midline. At the same time, the neural crest forms and emigrate. Perhaps most strikingly, individual neurons or groups of similar neurons originate at predictable times and at precise positions within the various regions of the neural tube. In some cases, neurons remain in their position of origin during and following differentiation in other cases, young neurons or their precursors are directed to migrate along stereotypic paths to settle in locations distant from their position of origin. Correct specifi cation of this intricate spatial ordering, or pattern, of cells is crucial to later events in CNS development when neurons establish complex arrays of specifi c interconnection that constitute functional networks. Activity-dependent processes and regressive events, such as the pruning of axons and cell death, later reinforce and refi ne initial patterns of connectivity, but a high degree of precision is achieved from the outset, dependent on, and as a direct result of, appropriate cell patterning. How the different regions of the CNS, and the individual cell types they each contain, are assigned their identity in early development remains an outstanding problem in neurobiology.Until recently, studies of the earliest developmental stages have been hampered severely by our inability to detect nascent pattern. However, discovery of a multitude of molecular markers that reveal subregions of the neuroepithelium has made it possible to visualize emergent heterogeneity in what was previously seen only as a "white sheet" of cells.From its inception, the central nervous system is organized along orthogonal axes: longitudinal and transverse. Neural tube folding and closure defl ect the transverse axis from its original lateromedial orientation so that it becomes dorsoventral with respect to the body. The third axis is radial and has little involvement in early patterning, as the radial organization of the tube is largely uniform throughout. In contrast, both the AP and DV axes are nonuniform. Different neuronal types appear at different positions in these two dimensions as if reading their grid references on a map. Indeed, a Cartesian coordinate system of positional information is a useful framework with which to visualize neural pattern. As shown later, various morphogens act as positional signals on one or other of the two main axes, usually by establishing gradients of activity as their concentration falls with distance from a localized source. Uncommitted neural precursor cells respond to the local morphogen concentration by expressing specifi c transcriptional mediator genes that encode the positional value of the region. In effect, cells measure their position by reading the strength of signals and fi nally adopt a specifi c fate that is appropriate for their APDV grid reference in the neuroepithelium. An assigned positional value not only directs differentiation but also, for migrating neurons, translocation away from the site of origin to a new location. As we will see in the following sections, the patterning mechanisms used to regionalize the DV axis are remarkably uniform along the length of the neural tube, but those that operate on the AP axis vary considerably between telencephalon and spinal cord.The initial establishment of AP polarity along the neuraxis is coupled intimately to the establishment of the main body axis during early embryonic development. Although AP axis formation in the vertebrate embryo remains poorly understood, it may have conceptual similarities with the strategies used for axis determination in the Drosophila embryo, where genetic studies have produced a detailed understanding. In Drosophila, AP polarity is fi rst established by a gradient of positional information produced by the maternal morphogen Bicoid emanating from the anterior pole of the egg. The gradient of the Bicoid transcription factor initiates a cascade of transcription factor activation that progressively subdivides the body axes further into smaller segmental units. As these repeat units are established, genes of the Antennapedia Bithorax homeotic complex act in a wellordered manner to defi ne unique segment identities. Similarly, formation of the AP body axis in vertebrates is likely to involve the imposition of a crude polarity of transcription factor expression, which is then refi ned at later stages into smaller domains of gene expression. Despite these conceptual similarities, the vertebrate embryo differs markedly from Drosophila where the AP axis is laid down essentially at the same time along the entire cylindrical-shaped embryo. In higher vertebrates, those parts of the neuraxis lying posterior to the hindbrain are "added-on" by dividing cells that extend the axis in an anterior to posterior direction in a progressive manner during gastrulation. As a consequence, AP patterning of the vertebrate nervous system is temporally more asynchronous and protracted, and spatially more complex .As discussed in an earlier section, the transplant experiments of Mangold and Spemann also revealed the role of organizer tissues in imparting AP polarity on the developing CNS. Specifi cally, organizer tissue can be subdivided into two parts: a head organizer that induces anterior structures and a trunktail organizer that induces posterior structures. The two types of organizer tissue differ in their position within blastula stage embryos, their time of involution during gastrulation, where they come to lie after gastrulation is complete, and what tissue derivatives they form As described above for neural induction, the study of early neural patterning has been aided by molecular tools to manipulate various signaling pathways in embryos, as well as the ability to reveal the formation of a nascent pattern based on the expression of genes that mark different regions of neural tissue. One major insight from these recent studies is that members of the secreted Wnt family act in combination with the anti-BMP neuralizing agents to induce posterior neural The identifi cation of signaling molecules that could posteriorize neural tissue was aided by assays using explants of isolated ectoderm from Xenopus embryos neuralized by BMP inhibitors, or explants of the early, anterior chick neural plate dissected from embryos. These explants typically express anterior neural markers, such as the homeobox gene, Otx2, but not more posterior neural markers indicative of the hindbrain or spinal cord. Treating these explants with members of the Wnt family however, suppresses anterior neural marker expression and upregulates the expression of posterior markers. The WNTs are expressed by trunktail organizer tissue, making them strong candidates as signals required for posteriorizing the central nervous system when it fi rst forms A role for Wnt signaling in posteriorizing the nervous system is also supported by mutations that deregulate Wnt activity in Zebrafi sh embryos, thereby causing a loss of prechordal neural plate and expansion of the epichordal neural plate. This phenotype is observed in Zebrafi sh masterblind and in headless, both of which encode molecules that act to keep the Wnt pathway off in the anterior neural plate In addition to the WNTs, the trunktail organizer produces other secreted molecules that may impart initial AP polarity on the neural plate as it fi rst forms. One of these, FGF8, is required for extending the posterior axis, by maintaining a population of stem cells in Hensens node that progressively emerge to form posterior neural tissue AP patterning of the CNS begins during the process of neural induction as dorsal ectoderm takes on a neural fate. This process divides nascent neural tissue into prechordal and epichordal neural plate regions based on signals that come from adjacent head and tail organizing tissues. Formation of the prechordal plate requires two inhibitory signals produced by the head organizer: one that inhibits BMP and the other WNT signaling. Tail organizer tissue produces potent posteriorizing agents, including WNTs, FGFs, and RA. The extent of signals required for generating AP polarity, however, is not fully known and the details of their action remain to be explored. Interestingly, both neural and anterior-neural are default states, requiring specifi c molecular activity to become nonneural or posterior-neural.Following the establishment of polarity along the AP axis of the embryo and the delineation of prechordal and epichordal regions of the neural plate, the AP axis becomes further regionalized into smaller and smaller domains, as revealed by the expression of developmental control genes. This process of progressive regional refi nement involves two general classes of mechanism-the establishment of local organizers as sources of diffusible factors that inform neighboring cells about their position and fate, and the partitioning of the neuroepithelium into small modules or segments in which development can proceed with a degree of autonomy. In both cases, a conspicuous and important feature is the setting up of boundaries, which position a local organizer, contain cells within a compartment, or both. We will illustrate these patterning mechanisms by reference to selected examples. Our intention is to outline general principles rather than to provide a comprehensive review of nervous system patterning.Central to the illumination of vertebrate CNS pattern formation has been the discovery that developmental control genes related to genes with a known patterning role in the Drosophila embryo are expressed in spatially restricted domains of the neural plate and tube. These regulatory genes, many of which encode homeodomain proteins, include the Hox genes, which specify positional value along the AP body axis of the fl y embryo. In both fl ies and vertebrates the Hox genes have a clustered chromosomal organization in which the relative position of a gene in the cluster refl ects its boundary of expression along the AP axis. In vertebrates, the Hox genes are expressed in overlapping, or nested, domains along the AP axis of the early embryo, with those at the 3 ends of the cluster being expressed most anteriorly, in the hindbrain, where there is a precise correspondence between their anterior expression borders and the boundaries between the rhombomeres of the hindbrain neuroepithelium Accumulating evidence supports the view that, by encoding positional value, Hox genes control the identity and phenotypic specializations of subregions of the epichordal neural tube in which they are expressed. Loss-of-function mutations of anteriorly expressed Hox genes result in malformations that represent a transformation of rhombomere identity. In the Hoxb1 mutant mouse, for example, rhombomere 4 loses its r4-specifi c character and takes on that of r2, where the gene is not normally expressed Anterior to r2, the brain does not express Hox genes but displays spatially restricted expression of other transcriptional control genes whose homeoboxes are divergent from the Hox type. These genes are also highly conserved between fl ies and vertebrates. Two homologues of the Drosophila segmentation gene, engrailed, are expressed in a broad region either side of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary, which later forms the cerebellum and the optic tectum The gap genes orthodenticle and empty spiracles, which function as homeotic selectors in the specifi cation of particular head segments in Drosophila, have vertebrate homologues that are expressed in overlapping domains that encompass the entire rostral extremity of the AP axis with the exception of the ventral forebrain. The two empty spiracles homologues, Emx, are forebrain specifi c, whereas the two orthodenticle homologues, Otx, have wider expression, encompassing both forebrain and midbrain. The Otx2 knockout mouse has an extreme phenotype that shows the importance of the gene but betrays little about its function-the entire head rostral to r3 is deleted. This is explained by the fact that Otx2 is also expressed in the visceral endoderm that lies beneath the anterior ectoderm, where it is required for the induction of anterior neural structure during gastrulation An important later function of Otx2 is to set the position of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary, whose local organizer functions are discussed later. The sharp posterior border of Otx2 expression coincides with the anterior expression border of another homeobox gene, Gbx2, in the anterior hindbrain. Mutual or cross-repression between the two genes stabilizes the interface, forming a boundary where specialized signaling cells are generated. Experimentally extending the expression domain of Otx2 into hindbrain territory causes the Gbx2 border and MHB differentiation to retreat posteriorly, whereas extending the Gbx2 domain into midbrain territory results in a corresponding anterior shift of the Otx2 border Gene expression patterns have illuminated the time course and mechanisms underlying neural patterning. Functional studies show that homeobox genes direct AP pattern formation, establishing head-to-tail FIGURE 14.6 Hox gene expression domains in the CNS of fl y and mouse. Nested domains of Hox genes along the AP axis of the Drosophila CNS closely parallel those of their homologues in mouse. Compare, for example, the fl y gene labial with its mouse homologue Hoxb1. Hox genes specify a positional value along the AP axis, which is interpreted differently in fl y and mouse in terms of downstream gene activation, resulting in neural structure shared between the two organisms is the means of encoding the position of a cell along the AP axis. Homeobox genes and other classes of transcriptional mediator regulate position-specifi c development. How is the expression of these genes, or their upstream regulators, directed to specifi c domains of the AP axis In many cases, it appears that long-range signals from local organizers are involved, directly or indirectly, in activating specifi c regional control elements of these genes at appropriate levels of the axis. In the case of Hox genes, a gradient of retinoic acid signaling has this role of positional signal Immediately anterior to the expression domain of Hox genes is a territory, r1 and midbrain, that forms the cerebellum and optic tectum. A unitary process of specifi cation for these adjacent regions is refl ected both at the molecular level and by aspects of their developmental potential: the Drosophila engrailed homologues, En1 and En2 and the paired homologues, Pax2, Pax5, and Pax8, are expressed in this domain. The development of midbrain and r1 is coordinated by the MHB: heterotopic grafts of MHB cells locally induce En expression in the host and change the fate of the host neuroepithelium such that it ultimately forms tectal structures or cerebellar structures. These fi ndings provide compelling evidence that a signal emanating from the MHB is involved in local AP patterning.There are two prominent components of this organizing activity: WNT1, expressed in a transverse ring just anterior to the MHB, acts as a mitogen and to maintain the expression of En but is unable to mimic the activity of MHB grafts. FGF8, expressed immediately posterior to the Wnt1 domain, has midbraininducing and polarizing abilities Diffusion of FGF8 away from the MHB Two further local organizers operate in more rostral regions of the neural tube where a number of early expressed developmental control genes are expressed in a patchwork quilt of small domains, subdividing the diencephalon and telencephalon into a number of transverse and longitudinal domains. Signaling at the anterior end of the axis involves FGF secretion from a region known as the anterior neural ridge, which is responsible for inducing andor maintaining telencephalic gene expression and for maintaining telencephalic identity A second local organizer of forebrain pattern, the zona limitans intrathalamica, lies at the middle of the prospective diencephalon, roughly midway between the ANR and MHB Local signaling mechanisms direct the spatial expression of homeobox genes, which appear to be crucial to the delineation and subsequent development of specifi c anteroposterior subregions of the CNS. Retinoic acid, diffusing from the cervical somites, is in part responsible for establishing the nested expression domains of the Hox homeobox genes in the hindbrain. FGF8, produced by cells at the midbrainhindbrain boundary, is involved in the elaboration of midbrain and cerebellar structure. SHH, produced by cells at the Zona Limitans Intrathalamica, is responsible for elaborating prethalamic and thalamic structure. For both the MHB and the ZLI, tissues lying anterior and posterior to the signaling center respond differently to the secreted morphogen because they have different competences, endowed by the expression of Irx prepattern genes.Shortly after closure, a series of seven varicosities appear in the hindbrain neural tube. Although transient, these rhombomeres are true segments that play a crucial role in patterning Segmentation of the neural tube cannot proceed in the same way as for the mesoderm, where physically separate somites are formed, because the tube has to retain epithelial continuity, not least as a conduit for extending axons. Rather, the process must involve some mechanism that restricts cell mingling. Vital dyemarking experiments have revealed such a lineage restriction mechanism in the hindbrain: clonal descendants of single marked cells disperse widely within the neuroepithelium, but the spreading cell clone always remains within a single rhombomere, confi ned at its boundaries What mechanism is responsible for segregating hindbrain cells into compartments One possibility is that cells of adjacent rhombomeres have a different specifi cation state, involving the expression of surface molecules that would favor affi nity between the cells within a rhombomere but reduce affi nity for cells in adjacent rhombomeres. Consistent with this, cultured cell aggregate experiments have shown that cells from even-numbered rhombomeres mix evenly with cells from other evens, whereas odd and even cells segregate from each other. Thus, rhombomeres may partition according to an adhesion differential, obeying a two-segment repeat rule. Candidate molecules for mediating reduced intercellular affi nity or adhesion at rhombomere boundaries include the Eph family of receptor tyrosine kinases and their ephrin ligands Shortly after closure, the hindbrain neural tube becomes subdivided by transverse boundaries to form rhombomeres, a series of repetitive elements or metameres that have compartment properties. The existence of compartmental organization in the hindbrain suggests that cells become specifi ed in segmental groups during their confi nement in the ventricular zone and that they initially share a common identity, or ground state. First a row of similar boxes is formed and then the boxes are assigned individual identities according to their positional value, encoded by Hox genes. The lineage-restricted boundaries between rhombomeres may also act as local signaling centers, infl uencing neurogenesis.Spinal nerves form a ladder-like array on either side of the spinal cord, an obvious manifestation of segmentation, but here, in contrast to the intrinsic patterning mechanism that operates in the hindbrain, spinal segmentation is imposed extrinsically by somatic mesoderm that lies alongside. A serially reiterated asymmetry in the sclerotomal component of the somites allows axon to grow, and neural crest cells to migrate, only within the anterior half of each somite, where neural crest cells then condense to form dorsal root ganglia. The posterior half of each somite expresses glycoproteins that inhibit cell migration and cause growth cone repulsion or collapse. Thus, microsurgically substituting posterior halves for anterior halves results in the local absence of peripheral nerves, whereas the converse experiment results in enlarged DRG and motor nerves. Subdivision of the paraxial mesoderm into AP-polarized somites thus ensures a positional correspondence between the segmented dermomyotome on the one hand and its sensorimotor innervation on the other Although it lacks intrinsic segmentation and has a superfi cial uniformity of organization, the developing spinal cord does manifest distinct AP variations in cellular subtype composition, particularly with respect to motor neurons arranged in discontinuous longitudinal columns. Posterior Hox genes have domains of expression in the spinal region that underlie this regional cellular diversity.The entire neural tube has a characteristic dorsoventral zonation where different cell types differentiate stereotypically at different DV positions. The ventral midline of the spinal cord, hindbrain, midbrain and diencephalon, is formed by a palisade of specialized glia, the fl oor plate. Above the fl oor plate are fi ve zones containing, in ventral to dorsal sequence, V3 interneurons, motor neurons, and three other types of interneuron, V2, V1, and V0 The patterning of neuronal cell types has been studied intensively in the spinal neural tube, but the same molecules appear to be involved in regionalizing the DV axis of more anterior regions of the neuraxis. Unlike the AP axis, where local organizers signal position and fate to neighboring cells through single morphogen gradients, the DV axis has organizers at both dorsal and ventral poles and their respective morphogen gradients appear to counteract one another.Crucially involved in patterning the ventral neural tube is the notochord, a mesodermal skeletal structure that occupies the midline of the embryo directly beneath the neurectoderm. Grafting experiments in avian embryos have shown that both fl oor plate and motor neuron differentiation depend on notochord signals. Early removal of the notochord results in a normal-sized spinal cord in which both of these ventral cell types are absent, with dorsal cell types and dorsalspecifi c markers appearing in their place. Similarly, implanting a supernumerary notochord alongside and in contact with the lateral neural plate results in formation of an additional group of fl oor plate cells at the point of contact, with clusters of motor neurons on either side Although it fi rst appeared that motor neuron and fl oor plate induction would require different signals, one diffusible and the other contact dependent, a FIGURE 14.10 Model for neural boundary formation. 1. An initially uniform sheet of cells is polarized by a global signalling gradient, e.g., by WNT from the posterior pole of the neuraxis. 2. This results in a coarse prepattern of transcription factor expression, with blue induced at low signal level and red at a higher level. 3. Cross-repression between blue and red establishes two distinct populations of cells separated by a fuzzy interface. 4. Cell sorting processes depending on affi nity molecules regulated by the red and blue transcription factors then sharpen the interface, generating a sharp interface and reducing adhesion red and blue cells. 5. Boundary cell phenotype involves expression of boundary-specifi c markers. 6. The boundary cells then express signal molecules that spread laterally and induce prepattern-dependent cell fates. Later, postmitotic cells may migrate to new positions in the non-lineage restricted mantle layer. After Segmented pathways for motor axon growth and neural crest migration in the trunk region. The AP positions at which motor axons collect to form a ventral root motor nerve and crest cell aggregate to form a dorsal root ganglion are determined by somites. By the stage at which these constituents of the peripheral nervous system appear, the medial region of somites has dispersed and surrounds the notochord and ventral neural tube. The sclerotome is divided into anterior and posterior halves, which are distinct from each other according to cell density and molecular markers. All components of the peripheral nervous system are confi ned to the anterior half sclerotome of each somite, which is permissive for the migration of neural crest cells, some of which condense to form DRG, and the ingrowth of motor neuron growth cones.The ability of midline signals to infl uence development of the ventral neural tube is not restricted to the spinal cord. In addition to inducing motor neurons and fl oor plate in the hindbrain and midbrain, midline signals also are involved in the development of AP region-specifi c neuronal subpopulations. Serotonergic neurons of the hindbrain raph nucleus and dopaminergic neurons of the midbrain substantia nigra both develop close to the fl oor plate and can be induced to form in competent neuroepithelium by the notochord, fl oor plate, or SHH protein. The issue of how ventral midline signaling can elicit different responses at different AP positions is consi dered later.In genetically or surgically notochordless animals, dorsal markers are expressed in the ventral spinal cord, showing that cell pattern in the dorsal half of the spinal cord does not require notochord signals. However, dorsal cell types such as neural crest and roof plate, do not develop by default, but are induced by an interaction that initially takes place between the neurectoderm and the fl anking epidermal ectoderm when the two epithelia are still contiguous The DV axis is thus patterned by two counteracting gradients, emanating from the ventral and dorsal poles. At either pole, the transfer of signal molecule expression from notochord or epidermal ectoderm to the neuroepithelium attends the physical separation of the neural tube from the initial source, presumably ensuring a more precise control of concentration within the tube.At the time of neuronal differentiation, each of the fi ve zones of neuronal cell types in the ventral neural tube is defi ned by the combinatorial expression of homeobox genes. These genes are either induced or repressed As for the AP axis, where positional determinants of identity are conserved with Drosophila, there are also striking similarities for the DV axis. For example, the homologue of Nkx2.2, vnd, is expressed close to the ventral midline of the fl y embryo and is required for establishing the identity of its ventral-most neuroblasts Patterned cell differentiation along the DV axis of the neural tube involves the initial medial-lateral polarization of the neural plate and the later generation of distinct cell types at different DV positions under the spatial control and coordinate actions of an SHH-mediated ventralizing signal from the notochord and BMP-mediated dorsalizing signals from the epidermal ectoderm. SHH is both necessary and suffi cient for inducing a range of ventral cell types, including fl oor plate cells, motor neurons and interneurons, at different concentrations-it therefore has the prime characteristic of a morphogen. Patterning along the entire DV axis involves the intersection of opposing signals emanating from the two poles: BMPs act to limit the ventralizing activity of SHH, whereas SHH acts to limit the dorsalizing activity of BMPs.The early inductive signals that establish DV cell fate appear to be similar along the entire epichordal neuraxis. However, at a same DV position, there are marked differences in the identity of neurons at different AP positions, such as between oculomotor neurons and dopaminergic neurons of the midbrain and branchiomotor neurons of the hindbrain. That these distinct cell types arise in response to apparently similar levels of SHH signaling suggests that the choice of fate depends on the competence of the responding tissue-SHH must act within the context of previously established AP positional cues and previously specifi ed AP positional values Cross section of the telencephalon of an early mouse embryo, with signalling on the left and DV regionalization on the right. Ventromedial patterning of medial and lateral ganglionic eminences is infl uenced by SHH signalling from the ventral midline. BMPs and WNTs, produced by dorsomedial regions and later from the cortical hem, are implicated in pallium specifi cation. POA, preoptic area.The DV axis of the telencephalon is conspicuously subdivided into a dorsal pallial region, which becomes the neocortex and archicortex in mammals, and a ventral subpallial region that forms the basal ganglia. While the pallium remains a sheetlike roof over the lateral ventricles, proliferation in the subpallial region thickens the wall considerably, forming two swellings from which the basal ganglia arise: the lateral ganglionic eminence, which gives rise to the striatum, and the medial ganglionic eminence, which produces the globus pallidus. The pallial and subpallial moieties of the telencephalic vesicle are segregated by a longitudinal boundary, which marks the domain border of several dorsoventrally expressed developmental control genes and which may also act as a lineage restriction, at least during early stages of development The telencephalon is devoid of motor neurons, has no fl oor plate, and is not underlain by notochord. The absence of these midline structures raises the question of how the bilateral organization of the forebrain and the differentiation of its ventral cell types are controlled. It appears, however, that even in this terminal expansion of the central nervous system a common mechanism is used for ventral patterning. SHH expression spreads rostrally in planar fashion from the diencephalic fl oor region into the ventral telencephalon where it induces expression of the transcriptional mediator Nkx2.1, characteristic of the MGE The adult mammalian neocortex, developing from the telencephalic pallium, comprises a very large number of anatomically and functionally discrete areas-more than 50 in human. One diffi culty in addressing the question of how the elaborate areal pattern of the neocortex develops is that it is virtually uniform in structure and cytoarchitecture from one end to the other, at least in lower mammals such as mouse and rat. Furthermore, few known developmental control genes are expressed early enough to be candidate area determinants, and none of these is unique to a single prospective area. Thus, it has long been thought that the areal pattern is imposed on the neocortex by extrinsic elements, principally via the thalamic afferents that penetrate the cortex in an areaspecifi c manner. However, it now appears that the cortical neuroepithelium acquires regional pattern prior to afferent innervation and in a manner not unlike other regions of the neural tube, with transcriptional mediators being expressed in a graded fashion in response to a local concentration of morphogens diffusing from focal sources. Putative signaling centers include the ANR, which secretes FGFs, and the posteromedial cortical hem region, which secretes WNTs and BMPs. In the absence of area-specifi c transcription factors it is likely that areal specifi cation involves threshold levels of transcriptional control genes such as Emx2 and Pax6, which are expressed in opposing gradients along the AP extent of the cortex Transgenic mice are created by the injection of a cloned DNA fragment into the male pronucleus of a recently fertilized mouse embryo. The fragment will integrate into the host genome and be passed through subsequent mitoses to all the cells of the adult, including the gametes. The integrated DNA fragment, now known as a "transgene," usually is engineered to contain a promoter and associated regulatory sequences, a structural gene, and a 3 polyadenylation signal. Transgenes add to the genome. As a genetic element, the chromosomal site of integration is random, and there is no wild-type allele on the sister chromosome. As an expressed locus, the transgene message is made over and above the endogenous gene expression pattern. This technique can be used as both an analytical and an experimental tool. Used as an analytical tool, the potency of a certain genetic element to direct cell-or tissue-specifi c gene expression can be determined by using the element to regulate marker genes such as bgalactosidase or green fl uorescent protein. The genetic elements that regulate the temporal and spatial expression pattern of Hox genes in hindbrain, tyrosine hydroxylase in adrenergic neurons, and L7 in Purkinje cells have all been explored by this means. Used as an experimental tool, transgenes can exploit a genetic element with known specifi city to deliver a gene product to an ectopic cell site or developmental time. Thus, the PDGF promoter has been used to drive the expression of human b-amyloid precursor protein, the L7 promoter has been used to deliver diphtheria toxin to differentiating Purkinje cells, and the b-actin promoter has been used to deliver Hox-A1 to inappropriate sites in the developing embryo.Embryonic stem cells are stable cell lines derived from the inner cell mass of the preimplantation embryo. They are totipotent, which means that if they are introduced into a host embryo, they can contribute to all cell types in the resulting chimera. The use of homologous recombination in ES cells allows changes to be engineered in specifi c genetic loci in culture. By using modifi ed cells to create chimeras, changes can be introduced into the mouse germline and propagated as new mutations. The mutations can be insertions, deletions, modifi cations, or any combination of the three. When the engineered insertiondeletion disables the normal allele, the resulting mutation often is referred to by the slang term "knockout." These techniques alter the genome. As a genetic element, the engineered locus replaces a specifi c gene locus, and there is a normal wild-type allele on the sister chromosome. Used in this way, a knockout mutation can be used to model an inherited disease. Lesch-Nyhan, ataxiatelangectasia, and fragile-X mental retardation syndrome have all been modeled in this way. As an expressed locus, the knockout transcript is made instead of the wild-type gene product. This technique can thus be used to create a modifi ed locus such that the targeted gene is mutated rather than destroyed, in the same way an endogenous transcript of one gene can be replaced with that of a different one. Thus, sequences encoding Engrailed-2 have been inserted into the Engrailed-1 locus in such a way that the Engrailed-1 transcript is lost and Engrailed-2 is made in its place.These are only some of the ways in which the powerful new technologies of transgenic and knockout mice are providing powerful genetic tools for use in neuroscience research.Karl Herrup BOX 14.1ably set up early within the parent neuroepithelium and the role of thalamic innervation is secondary reinforcing, refi ning, or modifying this initial pattern Neural-inducing factors and modifi ers produced during gastrulation have a basic role in establishing an initial crude AP regional identity in the neural plate that emerges from the dorsal surface of the embryo toward the end of this period. Abrogation of Wnt signaling, by depletion of ligand or blockade of signal transduction pathways, is important in conferring anterior neural identity. Wnts, Fgfs and RA cooperate to posteriorize the neuraxis. The resulting coarsegrained AP pattern is subsequently refi ned by the action of local organizers. Acting on both the AP and DV axes local organizers exert regional growth control and either induce or repress transcriptional mediators of regional fate. These mediators, in turn, may also interact among themselves, sharpening domains of action by cross-repression. The combined processes of segmentation and compartition provide an alternative or perhaps additional mechanism for sharpening gene expression borders and cellular domains. These events result in the precise delineation of regions and subregions. Although we tend to think of neuraxial patterning as a series of discrete steps leading to greater refi nement, it is a continuous process that extends over a protracted period of development and involves a continuity of signaling systems. We have also presented this subject as if pattern is acquired separately on AP and DV axes, whereas it is clear that cell specifi cation on the DV axis must intersect with and act on already existing AP positional values. It is also clear that patterning mechanisms must be integrated with those that control neurogenesis, a topic that is considered in Chapter 15.In order to make a functional nervous system, the progenitor cells that proliferate throughout the induction and patterning of the neural primordium must eventually exit the cell cycle and differentiate into mature neurons of different types. There are a huge variety of cells types in the nervous system. Differences can be dramatic, such as neurons and glia, or even between types of neurons. Compare, for example, a cone cell in the retina and a cerebellar Purkinje cell. They have completely different shapes, patterns of connectivity, neurochemistry, and physiological characteristics. Differences can also be subtle, such as between types of motor neurons, which may differ only with regard to their axonal projection to different muscles and the synaptic inputs they receive.The distribution of different types of neuron follows a highly invariant pattern in a given species. Neurons located at a given position within the nervous system are always the same type. In vertebrates, this is true on the level of populations of neurons in many invertebrates, it is true even on the level of individual, uniquely identifi able cells. Experimental studies carried out over the last few decades have provided substantial progress in understanding how the right types of neuron develop in the right place in the brain. This chapter attempts to summarize some of the main insights gained into the mechanisms controlling neuronal fate.Neurons are specifi ed gradually by a series of fate choices that begin with their distant progenitors who make the fi rst decision between neural and ectodermal fates. Progenitors of the nervous system arise from specialized regions of the ectoderm called the neurectoderm In many invertebrates, including the fruit fl y, Drosophila, most of the neurectoderm is located on the ventral side of the ectoderm The neural tube of a vertebrate embryo forms a continuous epithelium that lines an inner lumen Progenitors of the central nervous system of Drosophila, called neuroblasts, separate from the neurectoderm and move inside the embryo as individual cells Neurogenesis proceeds quite differently in different parts of the neural primordium. For example, neuroepithelial cells in the anterior part of the vertebrate neural tube undergo many more rounds of division than those of the posterior part. In addition, the maturing neurons have distinct phenotypes and establish different types of connections depending on where they are located. When pieces of neural tube are transplanted to new positions, features such as proliferative potential and cellular phenotype often are carried to the new position, implying that, in the neural primordium, intrinsic determinants profoundly infl uence the fate of neural progenitors. These determinants subdivide the neural primordium into a "geographic map" with many different domains, each one characterized by a unique identity. The mechanisms underlying the spatial regionalization, discussed in more detail in Chapter 14, are intricately involved in neural fate specifi cation.Along its anterior-posterior axis the neural tube is subdivided into transverse domains that give rise to morphologically defi ned partitions of the CNS, including the spinal cord, hindbrain, midbrain, and forebrain Along this anterior-posterior axis, Hox genes, which code for Homeobox transcription factors, and segment polarity genes are expressed in sharply demarcated domains in the neural primordia of both vertebrates and invertebrates. These genes provide neural progenitors with intrinsic "spatial information" that refl ects their location along this axis The dorsal-ventral axis of the neurectoderm in both vertebrates and Drosophila is divided up by the expression of three conserved homeodomain transcription factors, called, vnd, ind, and msh in fl ies, which are expressed in longitudinal stripes along the extent of the neural primordium Although the mechanisms that originally set up the polarity of the Hox gene expression in fl ies and vertebrates are quite distinct, it appears that high dorsal concentrations of the signaling molecule BMP in vertebrates, or its equivalent Dpp in Drosophila, is key to establishing the relative domains of these dorsal-ventral specifying transcription factors Neurogenesis is patterned in time as well as space. This is exemplifi ed in Drosophila neuroblasts, which go through a program of proliferation where each neuroblast gives rise to a series of distinct GMCs. The fi rst GMCs of a neuroblast lineage tend to lie deeper in the CNS and usually generate neurons with long axons, whereas the later arising GMCs stay closer to the edge of the CNS and produce neurons with short axons. In the stages when the fi rst GMCs are generated, most neuroblasts express hunchback, and GMCs that arise at this time inherit this hb expression. Later, the same neuroblasts turn off hb and express Krueppel instead, and GMCs generated at this stage inherit Kr expression. Experiments in which hb or Kr is eliminated or expressed at the wrong time lead to predictable switches in the fates of early and later born descendants of these neuroblasts The expression of both spatially and temporally coordinated transcription factors in neuroblasts, preserved in their progeny, forms part of the rich intrinsic inheritance that infl uences the phenotype of each developing neuron.The neurectoderm of Drosophila is a mixed population of cells. Only some of these cells become neuroblasts others develop as dermoblasts. Cell-cell interactions that take place within the neurectoderm defi ne the number and pattern of neuroblasts. Experimental and genetic studies suggest a two-step mechanism for this process Most proneural genes are transcription factors of the basic helix-loop-helix family. In Drosophila, four of these genes form a complex called the achaetescute complex. Loss of proneural gene function leads to a reduction of neuroblasts. The neurogenic genes encode a cell communication mechanism that is activated within the proneural clusters and that acts to restrict the number of neural progenitors developing from each cluster to one or a few cells. The neurogenic genes Notch and Delta encode membrane proteins that function as signal and receptor, respectively. Activation of Notch by Delta sets in motion a signal transduction cascade Several AS-C homologues have been identifi ed in vertebrates. Likewise, multiple homologs of the Drosophila proneural gene atonal exist in vertebrates. In Xenopus, injection of XASH-3 mRNA into blastomeres leads to an increased number of neural progenitor cells in the neural tube. In similar experiments, an atonal bHLH proneural homologue, called neuroD, powerfully transforms epidermal cells into neurons Neuroblasts divide asymmetrically and differentially distribute intrinsic determinants to their two daughter cells to produce distinct fates, a large neuroblast that remains in the neuroectoderm to divide again and again, and a small GMC that moves further interiorly and divides just once more to produce postmitotic neurons.The initial positions of the two different daughters give a clue to the way in which asymmetric divisions happen. The machinery involved in asymmetric cell division In the vertebrate CNS, neuroepithelial cells fi rst tend to divide symmetrically, giving rise to two dividing progenitor cells, but as neurogenesis proceeds, some neuroepithelial cells, like Drosophila neuroblasts, begin to divide asymmetrically, in this case giving rise to one neuroepithelial progenitor and one differentiated neuron. Time-lapse observations of neuroepithelial cells in organotypic slices of the developing mammalian cortex show that divisions along the horizontal plane produce two cells that stay in contact with the ventricular surface, whereas more apicobasal divisions produce a basal daughter that migrates away from the ventricular surface while the other daughter remains in contact, consistent with it retaining a neuroepithelial fate All the processes described in this textbook require energy. Ample clinical evidence indicates that the brain is exquisitely sensitive to perturbations of energy metabolism. This chapter covers the topics of energy delivery, production, and utilization by the brain. Careful consideration of the basic mechanisms of brain energy metabolism is an essential prerequisite to a full understanding of the physiology and pathophysiology of brain function. Abnormalities in brain energy metabolism are observed in a variety of pathological conditions such as neurodegenerative diseases, stroke, epilepsy, and migraine. The chapter reviews the features of brain energy metabolism at the global, regional, and cellular levels and extensively describes recent advances in the understanding of neuro-glial metabolic cooperation. A particular focus is the cellular and molecular mechanisms that tightly couple neuronal activity to energy consumption. This tight coupling is at the basis of functional brain-imaging techniques, such as positron emission tomography and functional magnetic resonance imaging.The human brain constitutes only 2% of the body weight, yet the energy-consuming processes that ensure proper brain function account for approximately 25% of total body glucose utilization. With a few exceptions that will be reviewed later, glucose is the obligatory energy substrate of the brain. In any tissue, glucose can follow various metabolic pathways in the brain, glucose is almost entirely oxidized to CO 2 and water through its sequential processing by glycolysis This rather detailed information of whole brain energy metabolism was obtained using an experimental approach in which the concentration of a given substrate in the arterial blood entering the brain through the carotid artery is compared with that present in the venous blood draining the brain through the jugular vein This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank