which is more similar than found among morphologically indistinguishable sister species of some genera. The bases for the great phenotypic differences between humans and chimpanzees, including those in brain size and presumably brain organization, are not well understood, but changes in patterns of gene expression are likely to be important.The brains of primates vary greatly in size and fi ssure patterns. Humans have the largest of primate brains, whereas mouse lemurs have the smallest Lateral views of the brains of a human and a small prosimian primate, the mouse lemur, to illustrate the great range of sizes for present-day primates.somatosensory areas of the parietal lobe from auditory areas of the temporal lobe. Most modern primates share these two fi ssures. Many early as well as presentday primates also have an additional prominent fi ssure in the temporal lobe (the superior temporal sulcus).Other fi ssures are more variable. Among living prosimians, evidence about brain organization comes mostly from studies of galagos, nocturnal animals from Africa that are cat-sized or smaller and eat mainly fruit, tree gums, and insects. Their brains have only a few fi ssures Other visual areas apparently shared with all other primates include V3, a dorsomedial area (DM), and a middle temporal visual area (MT), all of which receive direct inputs from V1. Other areas, such as the dorsolateral area (DL or V4), also are shared widely among primates, but not enough is known about visual cortex organization in the various primate species to be certain of how many of the more than 30 proposed visual areas are common among primates. Some or most of these areas, such as MT, are not found in nonprimates, or at least not in a primate-like form, and these areas are distinctive features of primate brains Organization of the auditory system of galagos and other prosimians is not well understood, but they appear to share two primary or primary-like areas, A1 and R ("rostral"), with other primates, and they likely share several nonprimary areas as well. A1 and possibly R are likely to have been retained from nonprimate ancestors. The somatosensory cortex appears to be relatively unchanged from nonprimate ancestors, as an S1, S2, and PV have been identifi ed in galagos, and there are additional, narrow belts of somatosensory cortex along the rostral and caudal borders of S1. S2 and PV retain the primitive feature of being activated directly by inputs from the ventroposterior nucleus of the thalamus Although the brains of prosimians are not especially large, they share a number of primate-specifi c areas with anthropoids over and above the complement inherited from their mammalian ancestors. Overall, prosimians and other primates share a large number of brain specializations that likely evolved in early primates or their immediate ancestors The anatomy of early anthropoids suggests that an emphasis on high-acuity, diurnal vision and reduced emphasis on smell were important in their evolution. The endocasts of the skulls of early anthropoids indicate that the visual cortex of the temporal lobe was more expansive than in prosimians.Collectively, present-day New World and Old World monkeys cover a wide range of body and brain sizes. The extent to which fi ssures develop on the brain surface of these primates depends largely on brain size. All primates, no matter how small, have a deep calcarine fi ssure in the occipital lobe. Most also have a deep lateral sulcus (Sylvian fi ssure). These are the only well-developed sulci in marmosets, the smallest of the New World monkeys. Slightly larger New World monkeys, such as owl monkeys and squirrel monkeys, also have a shallow central sulcus and a shallow superior temporal sulcus. The largest New World monkeys, such as spider monkeys and cebus monkeys (capuchins), have even more sulci and resemble (at least superfi cially) the well-fi ssured brains of Old World monkeys, such as macaques and baboons.Both Old World and New World monkeys have all the areas of the neocortex described for prosimians, as well as some additional areas. Most notably, the somatosensory cortex has been altered so that areas 3a, 3b, 1, and 2 are well differentiated from each other, with each area corresponding to a separate representation of receptors of the contralateral body surface In all anthropoids, S2 and PV appear to have lost activating inputs from the ventroposterior nucleus of the somatosensory thalamus, and they depend on inputs from areas 3a, 3b, 1, and 2 ( Currently, there is much interest in how the visual system of monkeys is subdivided into cortical areas and how these visual areas function in behavior. Elaborate proposals have been presented, but considerable uncertainty remains. In Old World monkeys, over 30 visual areas have been proposed, and it seems likely that anthropoids in general have more visual areas than prosimians, although the full extent of this difference is not yet clear. In the auditory cortex, a core of three primary-like areas, a belt of seven to eight additional fi elds, and a "parabelt" of several additional areas have been proposed, but not enough is known about auditory cortex of prosimians to know what differences exist. The proposed subdivisions of the motor cortex in prosimians and simians are quite similar, although some of the premotor areas of prosimians have been subdivided into two or three areas in Old World monkeys. Finally, comparisons of cortical connections and architectonics in galagos and macaque monkeys have led to the conclusion that macaques have several areas of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in addition to those found in galagos.In trying to determine the recent course of the evolution of the human brain, we depend more on the fossil record than on a comparative approach, as we are the only surviving hominin species. Human brains are much bigger than those of our closest living relatives, the African apes. From the fossil record In deducing the changes in internal organization that likely occurred over this remarkable increase in brain size, it would be useful to know more about the organization of the brains of the living apes. However, only limited information is available from early motor and somatosensory mapping experiments on apes, and further noninvasive studies, as in humans, are needed. Much can be learned by studying the histology of tissue from brains of apes that have died natural deaths using modern histochemical techniques One of the signature specializations of Homo sapiens is of course language, and it often has been assumed that the evolution of language involved the evolution of specialized language areas in the brain, such as Wernicke's area in the temporoparietal cortex and Broca's area in the frontal lobe. Human brains are not symmetrical in shape, so that the planum temporale, the sheet of cortex on the lower surface of the lateral sulcus (the upper face of the temporal lobe), is usually larger in the left cerebral hemisphere than on the right. As the left hemisphere usually becomes dominant for language, the larger size of the left planum temporale has long been assumed to be related to language. Interestingly, however, great apes exhibit the same asymmetry of the temporal lobe as humans, despite their lack of language. When and how language emerged in hominins remain issues of much speculation, as does the nature of the changes in brain organization that support language of humans, ultimately acquiring the functions of Broca's and Wernicke's areas. Presumably, the evolution of language involved changes in the internal organizations of these areas (see, for example, A general assumption is that larger brains are better because they can do more. This does not imply that brains of the same size (or same size in proportion to the body) do the same things, because brain organization is modifi ed for different functions. Nevertheless, larger brains do have obvious design problems that are likely to have been solved in similar ways in the different lines of evolution. To some extent, neurons usually enlarge as brains get bigger, but dendrites and axons cannot enlarge much without compromising their functions. To maintain passive cable conduction in dendrites, There are two major ways in which larger brains can be modifi ed to reduce the design problems produced by larger distances and more neurons. First, the brain can become more modular, so that most connections of individual neurons are with neighboring, rather than more distant, neurons. This can be done, for example, by increasing the number of processing areas so that areas are usually smaller. In addition, areas can be subdivided into smaller functional divisions (columns or modules), which likewise reduce the need for long connections. Thus, larger brains are likely to have larger numbers of cortical areas, and larger areas are likely to contain several types of modules. Second, connections that require long, thick axons should be reduced as much as possible. This can be done by grouping functionally related areas together so that necessary connections between areas are shorter. An effective way of reducing the need for long connections, as brains get bigger, is to increase the degree of specialization of each cerebral hemisphere. As regions and areas of each hemisphere become differently specialized, the major cortical connections become more focused within the same hemisphere, rather than between hemispheres. As a result, the size of the corpus callosum does not increase proportionately with the size of the brain. In addition, proportionately fewer of the callosal axons are of the larger diameters that would be needed to preserve fast conduction times. Therefore, large brains should be less symmetrical than small brains. The large human brain appears to be extreme in this respect.Another issue is that large cortical areas are unlikely to function in the same manner as small cortical areas. Unless neurons compensate with larger dendrites and intrinsic connections as areas get larger, the computational window or scope of neurons will decrease. For example, as a visual area gets bigger, individual neurons would evaluate information from less and less of the total visual fi eld Other size-related constraints relate to mechanisms of development. We often assume that natural selection can act independently on each brain trait, but this is unlikely to be the case. Instead, selection may operate on a few developmental mechanisms, such as those that control the number of neurons or the extent to which correlated activity levels maintain functional connections. Along this line of reasoning, 2.1.1.1. C.The effects of varying the horizontal spread of dendritic arbors of neurons in large (A) and small (B and C) visual areas. An increase in arbor size (1 to 2) in a large area (A) produces little change in receptive fi eld size (circles 1 to 2 in the central 20° of the visual hemifi eld on the right), whereas such a change (B to C) in a small area changes the scope of the receptive fi eld greatly. Thus, the functions of small areas are changed more dramatically by small morphological adjustments. Surface view schematics of retinotopically organized visual areas are on the left, whereas schematics of receptive fi elds in the visual hemifi eld and the lower visual quadrant are on the right. From the genetics and mechanisms of development and how development is modifi ed in evolution, we should be able to form more accurate models of brain evolution, and understand more fully how the human brain emerged from those of our ancestors. We might also benefi t from considerations of other possible constraints on brain size. A larger brain creates more heat, and thus needs a better cooling system Although brain size has important implications for brain function, distantly related species of about the same brain size sometimes appear to have quite different behavioral capacities. One reason, of course, is that the brains may be organized differently; sharing for example, some cortical areas but not others, or specializing shared cortical areas in different ways. Although more comparative studies are needed, it seems unlikely that large rodents with brains as large as those of some monkeys have as many cortical areas as the monkeys. Specializations of shared (homologous) areas are probably quite common. Primates, for example, exhibit a number of variations in the organization of primary visual cortex, including specializations found in apes and humans, but not monkeys, as well as specializations that are restricted to humans Another important factor is that recent studies indicate that primate brains simply have many more neurons than rodent brains (and probably the brains of other taxanomic groups) of the same size Based on comparative studies and the fossil record, we conclude that early mammals had small brains with little neocortex and few functional subdivisions (areas or fi elds) of cortex. Vision was emphasized in the early primates, and the visual cortex in the temporal and occipital lobes enlarged. These primates also had several unique features of the visual system, including new visual areas such as MT, distinctive kinds of modules in V1 (blobs) and V2 (bands), separate magnocellular and parvocellular layers in the lateral geniculate nucleus, and a representation in the superior colliculus restricted to the contralateral visual hemifi eld. Several premotor areas were present, whereas the somatosensory system was relatively primitive. Later anthropoid primates had larger brains, more neocortex, and more areas of neocortex. The somatosensory cortex had expanded and included the four strip-like areas on the anterior parietal lobe, areas 3a, 3b, 1, and 2. We know little about possible specializations of the brains of apes. However, over the last 6 million years of evolution in the human lineage, brains increased three to four times in size, due mainly to the enlargement of the cortex. Although the relative proportions of the different cortical lobes remain similar in humans and apes, the available evidence suggests that the cortex did not expand uniformly in human evolution: the association regions of frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes are much larger in absolute terms in humans than in apes, whereas human primary sensory areas are about the same absolute size as those of apes. The expansion of nonprimary cortex was probably accompanied by a further increase in the number of cortical areas, modifi cations leading to functional and anatomical asymmetries in the two cerebral hemispheres, specializations for language and cognition, and larger expanses of prefrontal, parietal, and temporal cortex. The larger brains had many more neurons with a greater proportion of tissue devoted to connections relative to cell bodies, and presumably had a higher ratio of local connections to long-distance connections.Further progress in understanding the course of the evolution of the human brain can be achieved with current methods of investigation. We have the opportunity to learn much about the similarities and differences among the brains of various primates. Neuroscientists have generally concentrated on studies of brain features that are widely shared, but we need to know more about the differences in brain structure and function that make us distinctively human.The human brain has evolved over a very extensive period (Chapter 44), but an individual human brain develops rapidly over the fi rst few years of life, allowing the nearly helpless human infant to gain control of locomotion, language, and thought. The story of brain development in the early years of infancy through adolescence occupies the fi rst part of this chapter. This is followed by consideration of the cognitive changes that occur during this period of the life span and how these capacities are altered over the course of normal aging. The fi nal parts of the chapter discuss pathological processes that (1) affect cognitive development in childhood and adolescence and (2) can cause devastating cognitive impairment in the elderly.Brain development is an organized, predetermined, and highly dynamic multistep process that continues beyond birth into the postnatal period, well into adolescence in humans. Most of our knowledge about human brain development has been obtained through analyses of postmortem specimens and, more recently, powerful neuroimaging techniques. These approaches have provided extensive information on how the size and shape of different brain regions change from conception through adulthood ( Cortical development in most mammals is broadly divided into two phases. The fi rst is a genetically determined sequence of events occurring in utero that can be modifi ed by both the local environment within the fetal nervous system and the maternal environment. The second phase is one that occurs in the perinatal period when the connectivity of the cortex becomes sensitive to patterns of neural activity. Glial processes also critically participate in normal development, supporting cell proliferation, differentiation and guidance, and the formation of myelin sheets around axons. Brain structure size and developmental trajectories are highly variable and sexually dimorphic.Development of the cortical mantle in the human brain was documented extensively in the classic studies of The formation of dendritic spines and the time course of changes in the length and branching patterns of dendrites have been described for visual and frontal cortical areas in humans. Within the visual cortex, peak spine density is achieved around 5 months of age; this number then decreases until adult values are obtained around 21 months of age. Progressive elongation of dendrites occurs up to 24 months. Thus, during the period from 5 to 24 months, the major event may be a decrease in spine density rather than an actual decline in total spine number. Dendritic development in the visual system reaches mature levels in deep cortical layers earlier than in superfi cial layers, displaying the "inside-out" pattern of development that is characteristic of neurogenesis and migration (Chapters 15 and 16).Development and maturation of the frontal cortex proceed more slowly. Whereas neuronal density in the primary visual cortex (V1) reaches adult levels by 4 to 5 months, neuronal density in the frontal cortex fails to reach adult levels even at 7 years of age. Additionally, by 2 years of age, dendritic length in frontal cortex (which is mature by 18-24 months in V1) is only half that found in adults. Left-right asymmetries exist in the dendritic branching patterns of pyramidal neurons within layer V of the inferior frontal and anterior precentral cortex. During the fi rst year, growth is more advanced on the right side, but by 6 to 8 years of age, the maturation of distal dendrites on the left exceeds that of the right.As in the brains of other animals (Chapter 20), the immature human brain contains many more synapses than the mature brain In summary, these quantitative anatomical results suggest that, in contrast to other animals (Chapter 19), programmed cell death plays only a limited role in Arrows point to the emergence of various visual functions in relation to the increase in synapses in the visual cortex. NB, newborn. Adapted with permission from BRAIN DEVELOPMENT human brain development. Synapse elimination in humans and other primates exceeds that observed in many species, however, suggesting that modifi cations in synaptic connectivity may be particularly important for the development of complex nervous systems. Current fi ndings are consistent with a role for incoming afferent input in selectively stabilizing functional synapses and in eliminating or suppressing inactive contacts. The exuberant connectivity observed during development may also support compensatory processes in cases of early brain trauma, allowing surviving synapses to assume functions normally subserved by damaged inputs.Although the morphological development of certain subcortical structures, such as the thalamus and cerebellum, is nearly complete at birth, other structures continue to mature into early postnatal life. In the neostriatum, synaptic density continues to increase until the end of the fi rst postnatal month, and changes in neuronal and neuropil morphology are observed until 2 to 4 months postnatally. Refi nement of synaptic contacts proceeds until the end of the fi rst postnatal year when the striatal neurochemical mosaic attains adult characteristics. In the hippocampus, neurons have reached their destination at birth in all CA fi elds, but immature cells continue to accrue within the dentate gyrus throughout the fi rst year of life In contrast to the inverted U shape of gray matter development, white matter maturation in the brain continues long after the gray matter has reached its defi nitive volume life. Numerous morphological studies demonstrate that the corpus callosum is uniformly thin in the fi rst month postnatally. The genu and then the splenium undergo rapid growth spurts during the next fi ve months, resulting in their characteristic "bulbous" appearance.Increases in neuronal activity have been linked to increases in cerebral metabolism, as measured by neuroimaging techniques. Data show substantial subcortical activation in newborns, notably in the thalamus and phylogenetically old portions of the cerebellum, but little activation of the cerebral cortex. However, over the fi rst 3 to 4 years of life, cortical metabolic rate increases until it reaches levels twice those observed in adults. After 4 years of age, metabolic activity declines gradually to adult levels at around age 15. The time course of the rise and decline of activity, as revealed by positron emission tomography (PET), varies across cortical regions but parallels the rise and decline in the number of synapses in these areas, suggesting that the exuberant cortical synapses observed during development are metabolically active. As these synapses are eliminated, metabolic activity decreases.Refi nement in the circuit organization of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, like that of the hippocampal formation (see earlier discussion), continues until quite late in development. In the case of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a gradual decline in synaptic density continues well into late adolescence and suggests that connectivity in this cortical region undergoes substantial change until 15 to 20 years of age. These changes are accompanied by a decrease in metabolic rate during the same period Structural, metabolic, and physiological indices of human brain development all point to a long postnatal time course that displays considerable variability from region to region and from system to system. Thus, whereas postnatal development in the hippocampus proceeds until approximately 4 to 5 years of age, it continues until 7 to 11 years for the visual cortex and until around 16 years of age for the frontal cortical areas. The dorsolateral portion of the prefrontal cortex appears to be one of the last regions of the brain to develop. Interestingly, the development of myelin has been observed as late as the third to fourth decade of life for fi bers within the association areas of the neocortex. Finally, brain structure size and developmental trajectories are sexually dimorphic.Investigators are now attempting to link the types of neural changes described in the preceding section to the maturation of sensory, behavioral, and cognitive capacities in infants and children. Such studies are limited in number. Until recently, the predominant view was that postnatal development of the cortex is largely intrinsically determined. However, new studies of both animals and humans have revealed a central role for extrinsic factors in shaping the organization of neural systems and in permitting recovery from brain damage. Indeed, calculations showing that information in the genome is not suffi cient to specify the connectivity of the brain, together with evidence for the long-lasting existence of transient, redundant connections in primates, suggest that neural changes under the infl uence of environmental input play a signifi cant and persistent role in the development of functional specifi city in the human brain.The increasing metabolic rate observed in basal ganglia and many cortical regions during the second and third postnatal months is correlated with several organizational changes that occur in the infant brain during this period. Thus, the frequency of several subcortical refl exes (e.g., the tonic neck refl ex, the grasp refl ex, as well as the frequency of endogeneous smiles and spontaneous crying) decreases, presumably as a consequence of increased cortical drive on the brain stem centers that control these refl exes. A similar mechanism may underlie the observation that the risk of sudden infant death syndrome peaks during this postnatal interval. Specifi cally, this syndrome is thought to be associated with a developmentally regulated increase in cortical inhibition of the brain stem centers that control normal respiration.Several parallels have been noted between anatomical changes and the emergence of visual system function in humans. The visual abilities of the newborn have been linked to subcortical structures that show mature anatomy and high metabolic rates during this period. The limited visual abilities of the newborn are augmented by the appearance of smooth pursuit tracking around 6 to 8 weeks. The emergence of this capacity may be related to the maturation of cortical layers IV, V, and VI in V1 ( The time period during which visual impairments can be corrected is different for different visual functions. For example, correction for an absent lens (aphakia) due to cataracts may be completely effective only when performed prior to 2 months of age (i.e., just prior to the onset of exuberant synaptogenesis in V1). However, very high synaptic density persists to at least the age of 4 years in V1. The presence of this extensive connectivity may account for the ability to recover from amblyopia (with forced use of the strabismic eye) during this time. If the disruption of binocular convergence by strabismus is not corrected within the fi rst year of life, the ability to see stereoscopically may not develop even though the development of acuity and contrast sensitivity is normal. Thus, there may be separate critical periods Studies of individuals born deaf and blind suggest that in humans, as in other animals, there is a time period when cortical areas that normally process information from the deprived modality can be reorganized to process information from intact modalities. From the alteration of visual functions seen in individuals born deaf, it appears that areas of the auditory cortex have been recruited for visual function. Deaf subjects, by comparison, show abnormally strong electrical responses to peripheral visual stimuli. These responses are not found in normally hearing individuals, even those exposed to sign language by deaf parents. The prolonged persistence of exuberant cortico-cortico connections may provide the substrate for such cortical reorganization.A multitude of visual cortical areas located in the striate and extrastriate cortex contribute to different aspects of visual processing (Chapter 46). These visual areas have been divided into two visual processing systems, one coursing ventrally from the striate and extrastriate areas to the ventrolateral temporal cortex and the other coursing dorsally from the striate and extrastriate cortex to the parietal cortex. The dorsal stream mediates spatial processing associated with attention to movement and location, whereas the ventral stream is involved primarily in processing information about patterns and objects. Both streams project rostrally, each reaching common and adjacent areas of the prefrontal cortex.Major functions of the ventral stream include the ability both to segment a pattern into a set of constituent parts (local level of processing) and to integrate those parts into a coherent whole (global level of processing). In adults, systematic differences exist in the distribution of global and local levels of processing within the brain, such that global levels of processing are associated with the right posterior temporal region and local levels of processing with the left posterior temporal regions. Around 4 months of age, infants show hemispheric differences for global and local processing that are similar to adults. Thus, at this age, children segment out well-formed units and use simple associations to organize these units into a confi gura-tion. With further maturation, children show changes in the way they decompose objects into parts and in the relations they use to organize the parts. These changes may refl ect the protracted development of the posterior temporal cortical areas, a fi nding consistent with ERP studies in human infants indicating functional activation within the temporal cortical areas around 6 months of age. The latter observation parallels the emergence, around the same age, of object representation and visual rule learning A variety of spatial processes have been associated with activation of the dorsal visual pathway, such as the processing of information about spatial attention and spatial location (Chapter 47). Considerable clinical and experimental evidence shows that the posterior parietal lobe plays a crucial role in the ability to shift attention to different spatial locations. By at least 6 months of age, infants, like adults, show facilitated stimulus detection as a function of prior cueing; that is, they take less time to detect an object if it is presented at a location that has been cued previously. They also demonstrate, as do adults, quicker target detection when the interval between the cue and target is short than when this interval is long. Even though this basic attentional response may be robust as early as 4 months of age, the timing parameters that elicit the response change with development, suggesting that further maturational processes occur in the parietal cortex.Looking preference has been used to study the emergence of recognition memory ability in both human infants and monkeys The early emergence and continued improvement of recognition and recall abilities is consistent with what is known about maturation of the hippocampal formation in both humans and monkeys (see earlier discussion). In both species, the hippocampal formation is almost adult-like at birth, although there are a number of postnatal morphological refi nements that continue until the end of the fi rst year in monkeys and until about 4 to 5 years of age in humans. These protracted modifi cations in hippocampal circuitry, together with the further maturation of cortical areas in the temporal and prefrontal lobes, may provide a basis for the relatively late elaboration of certain capacities, including spatial and relational memory (Chapters 50 and 52) around 1 year of age in monkeys and 4 to 5 years of age in humans.The human face is a powerful visual source of social information, and the development of face-processing abilities appears to follow a delayed postnatal development. Newborns preferentially orient to faces, recognize the mother and other familiar faces, and imitate facial expressions. These precocious tendencies appear to be mediated by a subcortical retinotectal pathway. For example, newborns display preferences selectively for moving stimuli presented in the peripheral visual fi eld (i.e., under conditions that engage the subcortical systems), but not when they are displayed in the central visual fi eld.The fact that newborns just hours to days after birth look longer at the mother's face than a stranger's face (even when cues from her smell and voice are eliminated) indicates that, from very early on, there is a mechanism capable of learning about individual faces based on experience. This early learning system may be mediated by the hippocampal formation, as this area is known to be involved in memory and it matures early relative to memory-related neocortical areas (see earlier discussion). Nevertheless, the face-processing abilities of the newborn are qualitatively different than the sophisticated capacities present in the adult, and none of these tendencies are necessarily the direct precursors of the cortically mediated, adult faceprocessing system (Chapter 46). Instead, these responses might serve the purpose of providing input to developing cortical circuits that will at some later time functionally emerge to mediate face processing.A marked change in infants' visual attention to faces occurs at approximately 8 weeks of age. At this time, infants' preferential following of peripheral moving faces declines, and a preference emerges for fi xating faces compared to other patterns presented in the central visual fi eld. This behavioral change is thought to be due to the functional development of visual cortical pathways that inhibit the preferential following response and mediate the new preferential fi xation response. At 2 months of age, infants become more sensitive to the internal facial features of static faces. In addition, within the face, the eyes are a more salient feature of the face than the nose or mouth, but where the eyes are located is immaterial to the babies' preference for face-like drawings. Furthermore, at roughly the same age, infants begin to relate information between individual faces and to form categories; that is, they perceive visual stimuli with comparable features as being more similar than visual stimuli with different features. They also exhibit inversion effects (i.e., recognition of upright faces is easier than recognition of inverted faces). The change between 1 and 3 months has been associated with the functional development of temporal cortical areas and their connections with the hippocampus and adjacent structures. However, at this early age, the change may not be specifi c to faces, as 3-month-old infants can form perceptual categories of a variety of other complex categories, such as tables and trees.By 4 to 9 months, hemispheric differences in face processing emerge, as babies at this age move their eyes more quickly to the mother's face than a stranger's face when the stimuli are presented in the left visual fi eld, but not when they are presented in the right visual fi eld. In contrast, simple geometric shapes are discriminated equally well in either visual fi eld. These results suggest that by this age the right hemisphere may be more profi cient than the left in recognizing faces. Finally, during childhood, the child's prototype of the face becomes more tuned to the types of faces that the child sees most often, and with this may emerge race effects and other species effects seen in adult face processing. Other race effects refer to the ability to distinguish among faces of one's own race more quickly than faces of other races. Other species effects refer to the ability to distinguish between human faces more quickly than faces of other species. These last changes may be based on experience due to increased exposure to faces, the number and type of features children attend to and encode, and the maturation of a posterior temporal cortical area (the fusiform area) that is known to be involved in face processing in adults.Although infants are able to discriminate among some facial expressions of emotion by 3 months of age, they do have diffi culty discriminating between sadness and surprise. It is only by 7 months of age that infants, like adults, show categorical perception of facial expressions. For example, with pictures of faces in which emotional expressions are progressively degraded from happy to fear, human infants and adults exhibit more accurate discrimination for pictures of faces that cross emotional categories (happy versus fear) than for pictures of faces within the same emotional category, despite equal physical differences in the pictures. With this increased ability to categorize faces, and the increased exposure to familiar faces, two remarkable events occur between 7-9 months of age: the emergence of fear for unfamiliar people and anxiety during temporary separation from the caretaker. Distress under both conditions must involve more than the ability to discriminate strangers from parents because 3 month-olds can make this discrimination, but do not show fear reactions.One speculation concerning stranger and separation fear is that improvements in working memory, and an enhanced ability to retrieve memories of a past event, are required for the appearance of these reactions. This change appears to be associated with the maturation of the orbital frontal cortex In an illuminating experiment, a preferential looking task was used to habituate 10-month-old infants to pictures of faces. One condition presented faces of different females, and in the other condition, the same female face was presented in various poses. After infants habituated to the stimuli (i.e., decreased their looking), they were given two test trials: one with a face of a familiar female and another with a face of a novel female. When infants were previously habituated using different female faces, they spent equivalent amounts of time gazing at familiar and novel faces on the test trials. However, when infants were habituated to the same face with different poses, they generalized their looking response to the familiar face but dishabituated (or looked longer) at the novel face. This pattern of results suggests that infants can abstract relevant categorical information by 10 month of age.Infants younger than 7 or 8 months of age will not uncover a hidden object. If a cloth is thrown over a toy while an infant of 5 or 6 months is reaching for it, the infant will withdraw his or her hand and stop reaching. By 7 or 8 months, most infants who watch an object being hidden can retrieve it. However, if the infant then watches as the object is hidden at a second location, most infants of 7 to 8 months search for the object at its fi rst hiding location, which is now empty. Jean Piaget called this the A-not-B error because the infant is correct at the fi rst hiding place (A) but not at the second (B). It is rare to see this error when there is no delay between when the object is hidden and when the infant is allowed to reach. However, a delay as brief as 1, 2, or 3 s is suffi cient to produce the error in infants 7 to 8 months of age. As they grow older, the error is still seen, but only if the delay between hiding and retrieval is increased. The A-not-B error suggests that during the second half of the fi rst year the brain has matured suffi ciently to enable the infant to hold a representation of the object's location in mind (working memory) for a few seconds (Chapter 52) or to understand the relationship of (a) their previous action of retrieving the object, (b) the subsequent hiding of the object in a different location (even though they observed the hiding), and (c) the object's present whereabouts In humans, the prolonged structural, metabolic, and neurophysiological maturation of "association" cortical areas, which continues well into adolescence, provides the substrate for the panoply of higher cognitive functions that continue to develop during this time. Attempts have been made to link the very rapid development of speech and language skills over the fi rst three years of life to these general changes. This goal has remained elusive, probably because so many aspects of the brain and behavior are changing together. Moreover, key elements of language appear to be processed at cellular and synaptic levels of organization that are diffi cult to investigate in humans with even the most sophisticated techniques available.There is wide agreement that language is strongly dependent on structures within the left perisylvian region (Chapter 51). Very early on (by 28 weeks of gestation), structural asymmetries appear between the temporal lobes; these may provide the substrate for the functional asymmetries that appear later. The rapid and early acquisition of phonological information and speech production and comprehension, and the subsequent burst in size of the vocabulary, may be linked to the rapid rise in the number of synapses and the marked increases in cortical metabolism that occur during the second year of life. Also, the persistence of large numbers of exuberant synapses through adolescence may provide the anatomical substrate for prolonged neural plasticity and recovery of language skills following cortical damage in the fi rst decade of life. It is well established that language skills can display considerable recovery following large lesions involving the left hemisphere during the fi rst 7 to 10 years of life. The impressive language recovery in children who have undergone left hemisphere removal is even more striking in light of the enduring impairment seen in specifi cally language-impaired children or the reading diffi culties encountered by dyslexics, in whom macroscopic aspects of brain structure are basically normal. These fi ndings underscore the importance of characterizing microscopic structural aspects of the brain and the functional organization of the brain in relation to processing.The prolonged time course of development that may confer plasticity on the immature brain appears to be characterized by optimal or critical periods (Chapter 22) for language acquisition. Several studies report that both fi rst and second language acquisitions are impaired, and cerebral organization is altered, when language is acquired after the fi rst decade of life. Moreover, as has been observed for vision ( Cognitive development parallels some of the most important changes in brain development. Thus, the visual abilities of the newborn are limited and control by subcortical systems predominates. With the maturation of visual cortical areas in the fi rst few postnatal months, visual acuity, visual alertness, and stereopsis develop. With further development of visual cortical areas within the temporal lobe, an infant's ability to recognize faces using internal facial features, mostly the eye region, emerges around 3 months of age. However, it is only by 7 to 9 months of age that infants develop fear of unfamiliar people. It is believed that this behavior is associated with the development, around this age, of the orbital frontal cortex, a cortical area that enables the infant to react to situations on the basis of stored representations (working memory). The enhanced spatial working memory abilities observed by the middle of the fi rst year parallel the protracted maturation and refi nement of the dorsolateral prefrontal circuitry. Finally, the maturation of association areas of the cortex, which continues well into adolescence, provides the substrate for the development of higher cognitive functions, such as language. In the future, it will be possible to analyze the neural basis of cognition in increasing detail by using high-resolution methods for imaging brain structure and function in normally developing children and children with specifi c structural or functional defi cits.The world's population is growing older. Whereas life expectancy in the United States was approximately 50 years in 1900, infant mortality rates decreased dramatically during the last century, and combined with advances in disease prevention and treatment, current life expectancy is approaching 80 years in most industrialized countries. A signifi cant demographic trend is that the percentage of the population over 65 years of age is projected to double over the next several decades, with particularly rapid growth among those over 85. Neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease are among the most devastating consequences of growing older (see section on Dementia, this chapter). There is increasing recognition, however, that many otherwise healthy aged individuals experience defi cits in memory and other aspects of cognitive function that, although less severe, signifi cantly compromise the quality of life. The following sections outline key concepts that have emerged from the study of normal cognitive aging in the absence of frank disease.Cognition encompasses a variety of dissociable capacities mediated by partially distinct neural systems, including perception, attention, executive function, and memory (Section V). This organization yields a valuable framework for the study of cognitive aging. Through careful analyses aimed at documenting the specifi c types and severity of cognitive defi cits that accompany aging, neuropsychological research has provided important clues about the brain systems that are likely to mediate dysfunction. This strategy has been widely exploited to examine the effects of normal aging on learning and memory, where a rich background of information is available concerning the characteristics of impairment that follows damage to selective brain regions in young adults.An important concept to emerge from neuropsychological studies is that the effect of aging on the type of memory mediated by the hippocampal formation and related medial temporal lobe structures is highly variable among older individuals As described in Chapter 50, normal adult rats solve the spatial, or "place," version of the Morris water maze by learning and remembering the escape location in relation to the confi guration of cues surrounding the testing apparatus, and this capacity requires the functional integrity of the hippocampal formation. Guided by this background, many laboratories have used the Morris water maze and other tests of spatial information processing to examine the effects of aging on learning and memory that are mediated by the hippocampal system Rats generally are considered "aged" at approximately 24 to 28 months of age, roughly equivalent to humans in their 70s. Relative to young adults, aged rats are signifi cantly slower to learn the hidden platform location in the place version of the water maze. Although these fi ndings are consistent with a possible hippocampal contribution to cognitive aging, an important alternative is that impaired visual acuity, motor function, or other factors might account for the defi cits observed in older subjects. This possibility has been tested using control procedures that make many of the same sensory, motor, and motivational demands as the hidden platform task, but that lack an explicit spatial learning component. In a common variant of testing, for example, rats swim to a platform that protrudes above the surface of the water, providing a salient visual goal to guide navigation. Because the position of the cued platform is varied randomly across trials, learning and memory for spatial information are not required. Many aged rats acquire this task normally, demonstrating that they can swim as rapidly as young adults, are motivated to escape, and retain suffi cient visual acuity to support cue-directed navigation As noted earlier, research in animal models has revealed substantial individual variability in the cognitive outcome of aging. animals exhibit marked defi cits, scoring outside the range of the young adult group.Variability in the cognitive effects of aging has been documented in other animal models as well. The neuropsychology of aging in nonhuman primates has been examined using testing procedures adopted from studies on the effects of medial temporal lobe damage in young adult monkeys (Chapter 50). In the delayed nonmatching to sample task, subjects are tested for their ability to recognize a visual stimulus across delay intervals ranging from seconds to many minutes or more. Young adult monkeys with suffi ciently extensive damage to any component of the medial temporal lobe memory system display signifi cant defi cits on this task, particularly when the memory demands are increased by lengthening the retention interval. Recognition memory also declines during aging in the monkey, and as in humans and rats, the degree of impairment varies substantially across individual subjects ( Behavioral studies suggest that the functional integrity of the hippocampal system declines during aging. Electrophysiological investigations extend these observations by directly assessing the computational processing functions of the aged hippocampus. Models of learning-related cellular plasticity, such as hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP; Chapter 49), establish a useful background against which to explore the effects of aging. A prominent theme is that aging infl uences hippocampal physiology in a highly selective manner that spares many properties of hippocampal function Once established, LTP also decays to prepotentiated baseline levels more rapidly in aged subjects than in young animals. This enhanced rate of decay is correlated with the rapid forgetting aged rats exhibit on tests of spatial memory, consistent with the conclusion that a reduced capacity for synaptic enhancement in the hippocampus contributes to this behavioral defi cit. Recent studies also reveal signifi cant change in hippocampal long-term depression (i.e., an enduring decrease in synaptic effi cacy; LTD), demonstrating that multiple plasticity mechanisms are affected in relation to variability in the cognitive outcome of aging.Electrophysiological studies of ongoing neuronal activity in awake-behaving rats shed additional light on how normal aging infl uences hippocampal information processing. As described in Chapter 50, a particularly well-characterized phenomenon is that the fi ring rate of individual pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus increases dramatically as animals navigate through a restricted area within a testing environment. This "place fi eld" activity is largely independent of specifi c behaviors exhibited during exploration, and instead seems to be controlled by geometric relations between the multiple sensory cues that defi ne a particular spatial location. Recapitulating a theme from studies of LTP and LTD many aspects of place fi eld fi ring remain relatively normal in the aged hippocampus, including the percentage of neurons that exhibit location-specifi c fi ring, and the spatial selectivity of place fi elds. The informational content encoded by the aged hippocampus, however, is reliably altered Related fi ndings demonstrate that hippocampal encoding also becomes increasingly rigid with age such that a relatively narrow subset of available spatial cues comes to control place fi eld activity. These changes are more prevalent in the CA3 fi eld of the hippocampus than in CA1, and among aged individuals that demonstrate impaired spatial learning One of the most widely held notions about brain aging is that a substantial number of neurons inevitably die as we grow older. Early studies supported this view, suggesting that neuron death occurs throughout life, with the cumulative loss exceeding 50% in many neocortical areas by age 95 (for an historical review, see Improved methods for quantifying cell number have led to signifi cant revision in traditional views on age-related neuron loss The fi eld of stereology has provided standardized tools for directly estimating the total number of neurons in any defi ned brain region, yielding an unequivocal measure for examining potential neuron loss during normal aging (Box 45.1). In contrast to early studies measuring cell density, the conclusion from recent investigations using modern stereological methods is that the total number of principal neurons (i.e., the granule cells of the dentate gyrus and pyramidal neurons in the CA3 and CA1 fi elds) generally is preserved in the aged hippocampus. Substantial preservation also has been documented in adjacent parahippocampal cortical regions that critically participate in memory. Whereas similar results have been observed in humans, data from animal models of cognitive aging are particularly compelling in demonstrating that hippocampal neuron number remains stable even among aged individuals with pronounced learning and memory defi cits. As illustrated in The entorhinal cortex originates the major source of cortical input to the hippocampus, giving rise to the so-called perforant path, which synapses on the distal dendrites of dentate gyrus granule cells in the outer portions of the molecular layer. The same entorhinal cortex neurons also innervate other fi elds of the hippocampus, including the most distal aspects of CA3 pyramidal cell dendrites. Multiple lines of investigation suggest that the integrity of these inputs is compromised with age. Electron microscopic quantification using modern stereology, for example, has documented that aging is associated with signifi cant loss among a morphologically distinct subset of synapses in the outer molecular layer of the dentate gyrus (i.e., the zone innervated by the entorhinal cortex) Normal aging is sometimes thought of as a generalized process of nonspecifi c deterioration across many neural systems, implying that age-related cognitive decline might be the cumulative effect of subtle alterations distributed diffusely throughout the brain. There is actually little empirical support for this notion, however, and as we have seen in the case of hippocampal circuitry, the current perspective is that the neurobiological consequences of aging exhibit considerable selectivity. At the same time, it is important to recognize that the effects of aging on memory do not occur BOX 45.1The fi gure shows the key features of a stereological technique designed to provide accurate and effi cient estimates of total neuron number in a brain region of interest. The hippocampal formation is used as an example. The method consists of counting the number of neurons in a known and representative fraction of a neuroanatomically defi ned structure in such a way that each cell has an equal probability of being counted. The sum of the neurons counted, multiplied by the reciprocal of the fraction of the structure that was sampled, provides an estimate of total neuron number.Serial histological sections are prepared through the rostrocaudal extent of the hippocampus and are stained by routine methods for visualizing neurons microscopically. An evenly spaced series of the sections is then chosen for analysis (positions represented schematically in top panel). This fi rst level of sampling, the "section fraction," therefore comprises the fraction of the total number of sections examined. For example, if every tenth section through the hippocampus is analyzed, the section fraction equals 1/10. The appropriate sections are then surveyed according to a systematic sampling scheme, typically carried out using a microscope with a motorized, computer-controlled stage. The lower part of the fi gure illustrates this design in which the microscope stage is moved in even X and Y intervals, and neurons are counted within the areas defi ned by the small red squares ("a (frame)" in the inset). The second level of the fractionator sampling scheme is therefore the "area fraction," or the fraction of the XY step from which the cell counts are derived.The last level of sampling is counting cells only within a known fraction (h) of the total section thickness (t), avoiding a variety of known errors introduced by including the cut surfaces of the histological preparations in the analysis. This is accomplished using a high-magnifi cation microscope objective (usually 100X) with a shallow focal depth. In the illustration provided, the "thickness fraction" is defi ned as h/t. Neurons are counted as they fi rst come into focus, according to an unbiased counting rule, called the "optical disector," that eliminates the possibility of counting a given cell more than once.Finally, total neuron number in the region of interest (N) is estimated as the sum of the neurons counted (sumQ), multiplied by the reciprocal of the three sampling fractions; the "section fraction," "area fraction," and the "thickness fraction." For the present example, the total estimated neuron number is given byOriginal illustration design by L. E. Mekiou and P. R. Rapp.Peter R. As discussed in Chapter 52, the functionally and neuroanatomically heterogeneous areas comprising the prefrontal cortex support a constellation of capacities referred to as "executive function." Whereas damage to these regions does not produce the frank amnesia that follows medial temporal lobe lesions, signifi cant defi cits are observed in a variety of processing functions that infl uence memory, including the strategic use and manipulation of remembered information, the ability to identify the source from which information was acquired, and the order in which it was presented. It is therefore of interest that a qualitatively similar profi le of defi cits emerges during the course of normal aging Neuropsychological studies in animal models reinforce the conclusion that prefrontal cortex dysfunction contributes to certain features of cognitive aging. One of the best-documented defi cits associated with aging in monkeys, for example, is poor performance under testing conditions that emphasize the spatial and temporal, or the "where and when," components of memory Numerous studies since the late 1970s have documented that aged monkeys exhibit a profi le of delayed FIGURE 45.5 Estimated total neuron number (plus S.E.) in principal cell layers of the hippocampus and parahippocampal cortices (i.e., entorhinal, perirhinal, and postrhinal) for behaviorally characterized young and aged rats. All values are unilateral. Half of the aged rats exhibited substantial spatial learning defi cits in the Morris water maze (aged impaired); the other half performed within the range of learning scores for the young group (aged unimpaired). Neuron number is stable with age and across a broad range of learning capacities. Adapted with permission from Are the effects of normal aging on capacities mediated by the prefrontal cortex coupled to other signatures of cognitive decline, consistent with the view of aging as a process of generalized deterioration? Available evidence suggests that this is not the case. For example, age-related defi cits on tests of prefrontal cortex function tend to emerge earlier during the course of aging than alterations in declarative memory supported by the medial temporal lobe system. In addition, when impairments indicative of both frontal and medial temporal lobe dysfunction cooccur in the same subjects, these effects are statistically unrelated to each other Although the basis of age-related decline in capacities supported by the prefrontal cortex remains to be established, an outline has begun to emerge. Similar to the hippocampal system, neuron death is not a prominent feature of normal aging in frontal lobe areas that mediate information processing functions known to decline with age. Other structural alterations have been documented, however, including a substantial decline in the density of prefrontal cortex synapses, marked changes in dendritic architecture, and a variety of abnormalities in the myelination of axons Gerontological research traditionally has focused on the nature and severity of age-related impairment with the implicit assumption that capacities found to be resistant to aging refl ect a preservation of the same mechanisms that support these abilities in younger individuals. A number of investigations, however, have demonstrated that, rather than exhibiting a simple pattern of regional decline or maintenance, normal aging is associated with a reliable shift in the relative balance of activations in brain areas important for normal cognitive function, including the prefrontal cortex and medial temporal lobe. Indeed a profi le of increased prefrontal and blunted medial temporal activation has been observed even under conditions where aged people score as accurately as young adults. These fi ndings imply that the distribution of neural systems engaged during testing is altered signifi cantly over the course of normal aging, and that successful cognitive outcomes may rely, in part, on adaptive functional reorganization Current evidence challenges the view that normal aging is associated with generalized deterioration distributed diffusely throughout the brain. It should be noted, however, that aging does affect the integrity of neurochemically specifi c classes of cells whose ascending projections infl uence widespread brain areas. Cholinergic cell groups in the basal forebrain have been studied particularly intensively because this system exhibits pronounced degeneration in Alzheimer's disease. Less severe effects are also ob served during normal aging, involving acetylcholine-containing neurons that project to the hippocampus, amygdala, and neocortex. A signifi cant implication is that cholinergic cell loss might disrupt the information processing functions of these target regions, and consistent with this possibility, reliable correlations have been reported between the magnitude of cholinergic defi cits and behavioral impairment in aged indivi d uals. Cholinergic abnormalities alone, however, fail to account for the full profi le of cognitive defi cits observed during aging since neurotoxin lesions that selectively destroy these neurons fail to reproduce key features of the behavioral decline observed in older individuals. One possibility is that age-related cholinergic impairment comprises an important component of a broader constellation of alterations that leads to cognitive dysfunction. Other neurochemical systems that might contribute include dopamine-containing circuitry that originates in midbrain cell groups and noradren ergic inputs that arise from the locus coeruleus. These systems innervate a variety of more anterior brain regions, and consistent with this broad distribution, neurochemical alterations have been linked to a diverse array of behavioral deficits ranging from age-related cognitive impairment to disturbances in motor function. These fi ndings encourage the view that appropriately designed pharmacological interventions might have benefi cial effects on a similarly broad profi le of outcome measures of aging.This section considered the cognitive and neurobiological effects of normal aging in humans and animal models. Key themes include the observation that the impact of aging on memory varies widely from one individual to the next. Whereas neuron death was once presumed to be the proximal cause of many cognitive defi cits associated with aging, including impairments in learning and memory, it is now clear that age-related cognitive decline does not require marked neuron loss in the hippocampus and related cortical areas. Instead, it now appears that subtle alterations in connectivity, and downstream changes in cellular function, are more likely the causative factors. Building on advances from in vivo imaging studies, a comprehensive, neural systems account of normal cognitive aging is beginning to emerge.Research in this fi eld focuses on elucidating the interplay among the biological, psychological, and social-contextual aspects of normal and abnormal development across the life span. Recent advances in neuroimaging and gene linkage technology have vastly expanded research possibilities for noninvasive clinical studies. Even with a new arsenal of research technologies, however, it has not been possible to isolate and defi ne characteristics of each developmental disability. Such efforts are limited by several factors:1. Disagreement regarding the criteria for diagnosis.Because different researchers often use differing behavioral criteria, cross-study comparisons frequently show inconsistencies in results. 2. Heterogeneity of disorders. Even when consistent behavioral criteria are carefully applied, different underlying etiologies can result in the same behavioral profi le. 3. Diffi culties inherent in the study of children.Although modern brain imaging techniques such as magnetic resorance imaging are considered noninvasive, they are stressful and timeconsuming, and parents will not always allow their affected children to participate in such studies. Although studies can be conducted using adults who have been affected since childhood, data obtained from such studies may not accurately refl ect anomalies that characterize the early disruption of brain development because brains change over time. Moreover, retrospective diagnoses of childhood disorders frequently rely on memory (e.g., a patient is asked "Did you have diffi culty reading as a young child?") and hence can be unreliable.Despite these challenges, ongoing research has uncovered important neurological and genetic features that seem to be associated with specifi c developmental disorders (see Boxes 45.2 and 45.3 for examples). The following sections outline what is known about how specifi c injuries or anomalies in development of the brain may result in specifi c patterns of cognitive and behavioral impairment. Two examples of developmental psychopathology are described: autism and schizophrenia.Autism is a neurodevelopmental syndrome characterized by defi cits in a broad domain of social interaction, play, language, and communication, and a restrictive range of interests and activities, including repetitive and stereotyopic movements and persistent preoccupation that begin in infancy and become apparent by the end of the third year of life. Although autism was once believed to be a rare disorder, recent surveys report a prevalence of 40 to 50 per 10,000 births. Parents often fi rst become concerned because their child fails to use words to communicate, even though he or she recites passages from videotapes or says the alphabet. Like other kinds of abnormal behavior, autism is a heterogeneous condition that can range widely in severity.A multitude of symptoms occur in autism, including social isolation (the autistic child largely ignores other people, shows little attachment to parents or other relatives, and retreats into a world of his or her own), stereotyped behaviors (the autistic child rocks back and forth, stares at neutral stimuli, rotates an object, or engages in other repetitive behaviors for long, uninterrupted time periods), resistance to change in routine, abnormal responses to sensory stimuli (the autistic child may ignore visual stimuli and sounds, especially speech sounds, sometimes to such an extent that it might be thought the child is deaf), inappropriate emotional expressions (the autistic child has sudden bouts of fear and crying for no obvious reason; at other times the child displays utter fearlessness and unprovoked laughter), and poor use of speech. Individuals with autism can also exhibit symptoms that fall along a continuum of disorders. For example, many have mental retardation and show delays in the development of language. Others display neither language delay nor mental retardation, although they are clearly Reading skills occupy a uniquely important position in overall cognitive development, strongly dependent on antecedent skill acquisition and critically supportive of educational success. After accounting for the effects of inadequate instruction, the most common cause of severe reading problems in childhood is developmental dyslexia, a disorder typically characterized by impairment in applying the sound-correspondence rules necessary to decode print (Chapter 51). Although reading impairment is common, with an incidence of 5-10% among school-age children, our understanding of its biological roots is relatively recent.Neurobiological studies of dyslexia are challenging, as the behavioral manifestations of this disorder are complex. Although defi ned by poor reading performance, dyslexia involves additional defi cits, including poor phonological processing, poor verbal working memory, and slow naming ability. Dyslexics frequently show subtle defi cits in motor control and early sensory processing, most notably in the visual system. Imaging studies have revealed that brain structure in dyslexics differs from that seen in individuals with normal reading skills. Micro and macroscopic structural abnormalities have been detected in perisylvian language regions (temporal and parietal banks of the sylvian fi ssure as well as the insula), visual system structures, the thalamus, and the corpus callosum. The planum temporale is an expanse of neocortex on the temporal bank of the sylvian fi ssure, its anterior border defi ned by Heschl's gyrus. From the time of birth the left planum temporale is larger than the homologous region in the right hemisphere in 70-80% of individuals. Reductions or reversal of this leftward asymmetry has been documented in individuals with developmental dyslexia. The functional concomitants of these anatomical variations have been explored in functional imaging studies that have revealed differences in patterns of task-related activity between dyslexics and controls during the performance of reading and phonological decoding tasks. Interestingly, the cortical areas identifi ed are similar in English, French, and Italian dyslexics, supporting a biological origin for this reading abnormality, independent of cultural upbringing. Similarly, candidate genes for dyslexia have been identifi ed and replicated in different countries, suggesting the multigenetic contribution to reading disability.Besides the problems related to reading, dyslexics also exhibit subtle abnormalities in visual processing. Evidence for selective involvement of magnocellular pathways of the visual system (Chapter 27) has accumulated, beginning with the demonstration that cell bodies in the magnocellular layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus are smaller in dyslexics compared to a control group. The fact that both contrast sensitivity and visual persistence are abnormal in reading disabled children is consistent with the notion that these children have disturbances in the magnocellular system, which is specialized for temporally demanding visual processing. These behavioral results are supported by functional imaging studies demonstrating less task-related activity in extrastriate and parietal cortex during visual motion detection by dyslexics.Future studies will determine the nature of the neural mechanisms that link defi cits in early visual processing with more cognitive skills such as phonological awareness. Also remaining to be clarifi ed are issues concerning which of these defi cits is a primary cause of dyslexia as opposed to a consequence of having partially compensated for a reading disorder. Such information will aid in identifying better avenues for reading remediation. To date, the best methods for improving the reading abilities of dyslexics focus on structured teaching of the code that allows individuals to sound out words (phonological awareness) in the context of fl uency and comprehension exercises. socially inept. Finally, autism is also associated with idiosyncratic interests and restricted and repetitive behavioral repertoire. For a long time, autism was thought to be the result of poor parenting. However, a growing number of studies over the last two decades provide mounting evidence that autism results from an early onset brain dysfunction.Several studies of autistic individuals provide evidence for megalencephaly (whole brain enlargement) and for increased head circumference. The nature of this enlargement has yet to be studied carefully, but it is specifi cally observed in the occipital, parietal, and temporal lobes. Postmortem analyses of the brains of autistic individuals have revealed increased cortical thickness and abnormalities in cortical morphology. Furthermore, abnormalities in the size and density of neurons in the medial temporal lobe and limbic system, including the amygdala, hippocampus, and entorhinal cortex, septal nuclei, and cingulate cortex, have also been documented. These neuropathological abnormalities make sense with respect to certain major symptoms of autism because the limbic system is known to play a central role in coordinating social-emotional functioning. Other evidence implicating this neural system in autism includes (1) case studies of patients with temporal lobe lesions and autistic-like behaviors, (2) a signifi cant and specifi c association between temporal lobe lesions from tuberous sclerosis and autism, (3) a volumetric decrease in the amygdala in autism, (4) reduced functional activity on SPECT scans in the temporal lobe in autism, and (5) animal models of autism based on early lesions to medial temporal lobe structures.A fMRI study of autism has documented dysfunction localized to the ventral temporal lobe using a face recognition task Signifi cant atrophy of the vermal lobules in the cerebellum has also been reported in autistic individuals, although this effect does not appear specifi c to autism and is found widely in neurodevelopmental disorders. By comparison, there is now extensive evidence for the involvement of higher association areas in the pathophysiology of autism, particularly the frontal and parietal cortices.The most compelling evidence for a genetic contribution to autism comes from studies of monozygotic (identical) and dizygotic (fraternal) twins. When one member of a pair of monozygotic twins is autistic, the other twin has more than a 50% probability of being autistic. However, if one member of a pair of dizygotic twins is autistic, the other twin has only a 3% probability of developing autism. Using conventional nomenclature, we say that monozygotic twins have a 50% or higher concordance for autism and that dizygotic twins have a 3% concordance. The relative risk factor for siblings is one of the highest for a complex genetic disorder.The most signifi cant genetic fi nding relevant to autism is the recent identifi cation of genes responsible for Rett's syndrome and fragile X syndrome, two conditions associated with autistic features. Rett's syndrome is caused by mutations in the methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene. Decreased expression of this gene leads to a failure to suppress expression of genes regulated by methylation. Fragile X syndrome is a disorder caused by mutation of the gene FMR1 (Box 45.3). A better understanding of how reduced expression of the MECP2 and FMR1 genes leads to mental retardation as well as social and lan-Not all neurogenetic diseases follow simple inheritance patterns; not all developmental disorders reveal themselves immediately; and diseases with similar genetic etiologies can have widely different manifestations. Trinucleotide repeat mutations, or dynamic mutations, were discovered only in the early 1990s but are responsible for a number of important neurodegenerative disorders, such as Huntington's Disease (Box 31.5), Fragile X mental retardation, and myotonic dystrophy. To date, 14 neurological disorders have been found to result from such a mutational mechanism, and the list will probably continue to grow.Triplet repeat mutations are unstable and prone to expand as alleles are passed from one generation to the next, although contractions can occur. Repeats at different loci differ markedly in their rates and extents of expansion, and the instability of repeats at each locus often depends upon the sex of the transmitting parent.Fragile X syndrome, an X-linked dominant mental retardation syndrome, was the fi rst disease shown to result from a triplet repeat mutation. There is a CGG repeat expansion at a locus (Xq27.3) giving rise to a folatesensitive fragile site (FRAXA). The CGG repeat ranges in length in the general population from 5 to 50 triplets. Affected individuals carry more than 230 repeats, up to several thousand triplets. CGG tracts between 45 and 200 repeats in length are termed "premutations"; they are not long enough to result in mental retardation, yet are prerequisite for further expansion to the full mutation. Escalating risk of affected offspring is associated with increasing size of premutations in female carriers. Curiously, offspring of male carriers of premuations are not at risk for fragile X syndrome, as these alleles have not been observed to expand to full mutations upon male transmission. The normal function of the affected protein FMR1 remains to be fully determined, but it appears to play a role in RNA metabolism, likely in the areas of transport, stability, and/or translation.Myotonic dystrophy (DM) remains a particularly enigmatic triplet repeat disorder affecting multiple systems, causing myotonia, muscle weakness, cardiac conduction defects, diabetes, cataracts, premature balding, and sometimes dysmorphyic features and mild mental retardation. There is a tendency for these features to appear in more severe form in subsequent generations of a family. In DM there is a CTG repeat in the 3′ untranslated region of the myotonin protein kinase gene (DMPK). This CTG tract is small in the general population (5-37 triplets) but can expand dramatically to thousands of repeats. Slightly increased lengths (70-100) can result in mild effects, such as late-onset cataracts, and the classic symptoms of early adulthood myotonia are found in individuals with hundreds of repeats. Very large expansions can cause severe disease in newborns.The mechanism(s) by which the mutation leads to the various clinical symptoms remains uncertain. A variety of effects have been described and the repeat expansions clearly affect both the DMPK gene and nearby genes. It is also likely that the expanded CTG repeat carrying mRNAs can act to diminish the levels of nuclear proteins that bind at these sequences, resulting in misregulation of genes not linked to DMPK. Mutations in equivalent mouse genes have not provided a complete model of the human disease. The phenotype in DM results from multiple effects of the repeat expansion, rather than a simple loss or gain of function mechanism.Friedreich's ataxia (FA) causes both limb and gait ataxia, loss of position and vibration sense, decreased tendon refl exes, cardiomyopathy, diabetes, and, in some patients, optic atrophy and deafness. FA is a recessive disorder and the only triplet repeat disorder known to involve a GAA sequence. Carriers of FA are rather common (1/85), and, consequently, so is the GAA expansion. Members of the general population carry between 7 and 34 repeats, and pathogenic alleles can number in the hundreds. The affected frataxin gene product appears to be involved in mitochondrial iron homeostasis, and its absence affects postmitotic cells rich in mitochondria. The mechanism by which the GAA repeat affects gene function appears to be inhibition of primary RNA transcripts.A second class of triplet repeat disorders includes those caused by expansion of translated CAG repeats that encode a polyglutamine tract in each of the respective proteins. These "polyglutamine" disorders share many features, suggesting that a common pathogenetic mechanism is at play in spite of the fact that the mutated genes share no homology outside of the CAG repeats. They are progressive neurologic diseases with onset of symptoms in young to mid-adulthood with only a specifi c group of neurons vulnerable in each disease. Symptoms develop when the number of uninterrupted repeats exceed about 35 glutamines. The phenotype is caused not by loss of function of the relevant protein but rather by a gain of function conferred by the expanded polyglutamine tract.The spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) are genetically distinct but overlap a great deal in their clinical presentation-between subtypes and even within families affected by the same disease. It is nearly impossible to distinguish one subtype from another on the basis of clinical signs alone. Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 1 (SCA1) was the fi rst of the inherited ataxias to be mapped. Patients with SCA1 suffer from progressive ataxia (loss of balance and coordination), dysarthria, and eventual respiratory failure. SCA1 is characterized pathologically by cerebellar atrophy with severe loss of Purkinje cells and brain stem neurons. Patients with SCA1 have an expanded "perfect" CAG repeat tract encoding ataxin-1, the function of which is largely unknown.Studies of human patients with deletions of, for example, the HD, or SCA1 genes (and of mice lacking these genes) confi rm that disease is not due to loss of function of the respective proteins. More importantly, studies of mouse and fruit fl y models that overexpress full-length or truncated forms of either ataxin-1, ataxin-3, huntingtin, AR, atrophin-1, or ataxin-7 demonstrate progressive neuronal dysfunction consistent with a gain of function mechanism. Several illuminating fi ndings have emerged from the study of human patients, cell culture systems, and the various animal models. In transgenic mice, expression of truncated polypeptides containing expanded glutamine tracts caused widespread dysfunction that extends beyond the specifi c groups of neurons affected by the full-length protein. The expanded polyglutamine tracts may cause the respective proteins to misfold or resist degradation. Aberrant protein-protein interactions or alterations in levels of proteins essential for the normal functioning of neurons (such as proteins that regulate Ca +2 levels and neurotransmitters), in turn, could exacerbate neuronal dysfunction and lead to neuronal death.The fi nding that chaperone overexpression mitigates the phenotype in one vertebrate and several invertebrate models of polyglutamine disorders, and the identifi cation of several additional modifi ers of the neuronal phenotype, provide a platform for identifying key pathways of pathogenesis and potential therapeutic targets.Adapted by Graham V. Lees with permission from Schizophrenia is a catastrophic illness with an onset typically in adolescence or early adulthood. It was identifi ed and defi ned in the early twentieth century as dementia praecox (Latin for deterioration of the mind at an early age). In 1911, Eugen Bleuler introduced the term schizophrenia. This term can be confusing because its translation from the Greek means "split mind," which is sometimes interpreted as multiple personality, a condition in which a person alternates between one personality and another. A schizophrenic person has only one per sonality and the split in the schizophrenic mind is between emotional and intellectual realms. The combination of signifi cant incapacity, onset early in life, and chronicity of illness makes schizophrenia a particularly tragic disorder, occurring in 0.5 to 1% of the population.The clinical symptoms of schizophrenia often are divided into two broad categories: positive and negative. Positive symptoms include delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, and disorganized or bizarre behavior. These symptoms are referred to as positive because they represent distortions or exaggerations of normal cognitive or emotional functions. The negative symptoms of schizophrenia refl ect a loss or diminution of normal function. Negative symptoms include alogia (marked poverty of speech or speech devoid of coherent content), affective fl attening (diminution in the ability to express emotion), anhedonia (inability to experience pleasure), avolition (inability to initiate or persist in goal-directed behavior), and attentional impairment. Although the positive symptoms of schizophrenia are often colorful and draw attention to the patient's illness, the negative symptoms are an important feature of the disease that impair the person's ability to function normally in daily life.The profound and pervasive cognitive and emotional disturbances that characterize schizophrenia suggest that it is a serious brain disease affecting multiple functions and systems. Auditory hallucinations and disruptions in linguistic expression suggest involvement of the auditory cortex and perisylvian language regions. Other positive symptoms, such as delusions or disorganized behavior, are more diffi cult to localize to specifi c regions and suggest dysfunction distributed across multiple neural systems and circuits. Negative symptoms may be related to the prefrontal cortex, which mediates goal-directed behavior and fl uency of thought and speech. The affective fl attening and asociality suggest involvement of the limbic areas within the temporal lobe.A great deal of research since the 1950s has made it clear that schizophrenia is associated with abnormalities in the dopaminergic synapses of the brain. Still, the exact nature of this perturbation remains elusive. The strongest link between dopamine synapses and schizophrenia comes from studies of drugs that alleviate the symptoms of schizophrenia. A large number of antischizophrenic, or neuroleptic, drugs have been found, most of which belong to two chemical families, the phenothiazines, which include chlorpromazine, and the butyropherones, which include haloperidol. All these drugs have two properties in common: they block postsynaptic dopamine receptors and they inhibit the release of dopamine from the presynaptic neuron. One interpretation of these results is that schizophrenia is due to excess activity at dopamine synapses. Establishing cause-and-effect relationships in human psychiatric disorders, however, is challenging. For example, although a substantial increase in the number of dopaminergic receptors is observed in the schizophrenic brain, because virtually all patients receive neuroleptic medication, it is not known if increased receptor density is a consequence of the disease itself or a response to an extended use of antidopaminergic drugs. An additional complication for the dopamine receptor hypothesis of schizophrenia concerns the time course for the effects of neuroleptic drugs. Although these treatments block dopamine receptors almost at once and reach their full pharmacological effectiveness within a few days, effects on behavior emerge more slowly, over two or three weeks. Clearly the symptomatic relief achieved with neuroleptic intervention involves mechanisms in addition to the blockade of dopamine receptors.One possibility is that the prolonged use of neuroleptic drugs decreases the number of spontaneously active dopamine neurons in what is known as the mesolimbic system, a set of neurons that projects from the midbrain tegmentum to the limbic system. Another possibility is that the underlying problem in schizophrenia is not an excess of dopamine activity at all, but a defi cit of glutamate activity. Glutamate is the predominant excitatory amino acid released by neurons in the cerebral cortex that project widely throughout the limbic system, and dopamine synapses are known to inhibit glutamate release in these target regions. If glutamate release is reduced in the schizophrenic brain, one way to correct this defi ciency would be to block activity at dopaminergic receptors, relieving glutamate synapses from inhibition.The most consistently described structural alterations in schizophrenia are ventricular enlargement and decreases in the volume of temporal lobe structures, including the hippocampus, amygdala, and entorhinal cortex. Cytoarchitecture and cell densities also reportedly are altered in limbic structures: reduced cell number and size have been observed in the hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, and entorhinal cortex, along with disturbed cytoarchitecture involving a cellular disarray in hippocampus, and the entorhinal and cingulate cortices. This distribution of structural abnormalities may help account for the symptoms of schizophrenia in that these limbic structures link neocortical association areas with the septum-hypothalamic complex and are therefore key in sensory information processing and sensory gating. Defects in this neural circuit could lead to a dissociation between neocortically mediated cognitive processing and limbichypothalamic emotional reactions and to a disturbed emotional experience of external sensory perceptions.The structural alterations reported in schizophrenia are often subtle and certainly heterogeneous, contributing minimally to the elucidation of the disease if symptoms are to be attributed to defects in single brain regions. Alternatively, it is currently hypothesized that the variety and severity of symptoms observed in schizophrenia can be explained by defects in several brain regions affecting the neural circuits that mediate higher cognitive functions. Such neural circuitry would include neocortical association areas, the limbic system and midline thalamic structures, with possible involvement of the basal ganglia.Several clinical observations point to neurodevelopmental abnormalities in schizophrenia: onset in adolescence in most patients and earlier onset among males, pronounced premorbid neurodevelopmental abnormalities, such as asociality and "soft" neurological signs; impaired cognitive and neuromotor functioning; minor physical anomalies; presence of structural abnormalities at the onset of the illness, which may predate the illness; and the absence of neurodegenerative processes.Postmortem morphological observations in the brains of schizophrenic patients suggest that multiple aspects of neural development may be disrupted. The spatial disorganization of neurons found in the hippocampus and the inappropriate laminar location of cells in the entorhinal cortex, for example, suggest a potential defect in neuronal migration. Other evidence indicates that the organization of synaptic connectivity is affected. The functional circuitry of the frontal cortex undergoes signifi cant remodeling until adolescence, mediated by an NMDA receptor-dependent mechanism. The number of these receptors is reduced in the brain of schizophrenics. Still other abnormalities involve biochemical alterations of membrane phospholipids in the dorsolateral prefrontal region. These changes include a decrease in phosphomonoesters and an increase in phosphodiesters. Such biochemical changes in membrane phospholipids are known to occur during normal synaptic pruning in adolescence, but appear to be exaggerated in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of schizophrenics. These enhanced biochemical changes may lead to greater synaptic pruning in schizophrenics than in normal individuals and contribute to the reduction in prefrontal neuropil volume that accompanies the disease.The precise timing of neurodevelopmental abnormalities in schizophrenia remains controversial. Some implicate a fi xed neural lesion from early life interacting with normal neurodevelopmental events that take place much later. Others posit that schizophrenia is caused by a deviation from normal brain maturational processes during late adolescence, involving largescale synaptic elimination or pruning in brain regions critical for cognitive development. Still others propose that early brain pathology acts as a risk factor rather than a suffi cient cause so that its effects can only be understood in the light of the individ ual's later exposure to other risk and protective factors.As for autism, a substantial body of evidence indicates that schizophrenia is associated with both genetic and environmental factors. Findings pointing to a signifi cant genetic contribution come from family, twin, and adoption studies. Evidence for environmental factors derives from studies of prenatal intrauterine envir onment, neonatal obstetric complications, and post natal brain insults. Currently, it remains an open question whether these environmental factors play a necessary role in the neurodevelopmental abnormalities responsible for psychotic brain disorders or whether their role is additive or interactive with genetic contributions.People with schizophrenia are more likely than others to have schizophrenic relatives. The most compelling evidence is the 50% concordance rate for monozygotic twins relative to 15% concordance for dizygotic twins. Neuroimaging studies of discordant monozygotic twins consistently indicate more prominent structural brain abnormalities in the ill twin. More importantly, a neuroimaging study demonstrated that schizophrenia is associated with dysfunction of a prefrontal-limbic network Shifting response strategies is diffi cult for patients with frontal lobe dysfunction. In the affected schizophrenic twin, prefrontal activation correlated strongly with both left and right hippocampal volumes; a relationship that was not found in the unaffected twins. These data suggest that schizophrenia could result from a dysfunction of a distributed neural network involving the prefrontal cortical areas and the limbic structures.Molecular studies also have demonstrated schizophrenia to be a complex genetic disorder and have implicated several possible susceptibility loci, including regions on chromosomes 1q, 6p, 8p, 13q, and 22q. Of genes mapped, the 22q11 gene (a common functional polymorphism of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), which is a methylation enzyme that metabolizes released dopamine) has been a popular candidate because of the long-hypothesized role of dopamine in schizophrenia.There are gender differences in the occurrence of neurodevelopmental disorders. The gender ratio of incidence is skewed toward boys for a variety of developmental disabilities, including severe mental retardation (1.3 boys/1 girl), speech and language disorders (2.6/1), learning diffi culties (2.2/1), dyslexia (4.3/1), schizophrenia (1.9/1), and autism (4/1). Why? Although the existence of sex differences in the area of language and learning disorders has been contested on the grounds that it is a result of teacher and clinician bias in identifying these disorders, studies have supported the existence of a signifi cant gender difference in the incidence of these disorders One theory posits that male but not female fetuses invoke a form of "antigenic" response from the mother during pregnancy, being recognized by the immune system as "foreign." The hostile environment thus created for the male fetus in utero would explain not only a higher incidence of developmental disorders among boys, but also the fi nding that later-born sons are increasingly likely to be affected adversely (consistent with increased immune responsiveness on repeated exposure).Another theory (the Geschwind theory, as it came to be known, after the neurologist Norman Geschwind) proposed that the uneven gender ratios in developmental disorders are associated with exposure to some "male factor" (possibly androgen) during the last trimester of fetal development. This factor acts to slow cortical maturation in male fetuses, particularly in the left hemisphere, rendering them more susceptible to perturbation during the normal course of development. This exposure to a male hormone would explain the higher incidence of developmental disorders among boys. Conversely, faster central neurons system development in female fetuses would enable them to better withstand insult during late pregnancy and birth. This idea is supported by evidence that female infants appear to show better cognitive recovery than male infants from intracranial hemorrhage associated with prematurity.This section examined two forms of developmental abnormalities: autism and schizophrenia. In both cases it is possible to link the behavioral manifestations of the disorder to anomalies in neurobiological systems and to identify a genetic component. In both disorders, too, affected individuals do not show localized damage in circumscribed brain regions, but show evidence of cellular disturbance early in brain development (i.e., during neuromigration), which gives rise to pervasive and dysfunctional reorganization of critical neural systems underlying complex behaviors. Emerging evidence suggests that similar mechanisms may characterize other developmental disabilities, including dyslexia, mental retardation, and attention defi cit disorders. Current fi ndings also support the existence of sex differences in brain development and organization, which may in turn differentially affect the response of the brain to early injury.Dementia is a generic term that refers to debilitating deterioration in more than one domain of cognitive function. The involvement of multiple capacities distinguishes dementia from other disorders, such as amnesia and aphasia, that affect a single functional domain (memory and language, respectively). Approximately 50 disorders are known to cause dementia. Most of these are progressive in nature, increasing in severity over time. The age at onset and the rate of progression of symptoms differ dramatically among the major dementing disorders. Most have an insidious onset and develop slowly, sometimes over a period of many years. These include Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease, frontotemporal dementia, and the dementia observed in a subpopulation of patients with Parkinson's disease. The rare neurodegenerative disorder Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease also develops insidiously, but is distinguished by a very rapid rate of progression, often spanning a year or less from the onset of dementia to death. Vascular dementia (or multi-infarct dementia) follows still another pattern of decline. Initial cognitive symptoms develop acutely, but in this case the clinical course typically proceeds in a step-wise fashion over many years, with periods of relative stability punctuated by abrupt deterioration. Age is a major risk factor for dementing illnesses, and the following sections focus on the most prevalent example of age-related dementia, Alzheimer's disease.In 1906, the German scientist Alois Alzheimer reported a case study of a woman in her late 40s who developed memory impairment and defi cits in other mental faculties that progressively worsened in severity until her death in her early 50s. Subsequent neuropathological examination of this patient's brain revealed grossly apparent and widespread neocortical atrophy that Alzheimer concluded was inconsistent with any previously described disease. Although the disorder that would come to bear Alzheimer's name originally was thought to be quite rare, it is now recognized as the most common form of dementia, accounting for an estimated 50% of all cases. Current estimates are that more than 4 million people in the United States, and 26 million people worldwide, suffer from Alzheimer's disease. The prevalence of the disease is tightly coupled to age, and increases after the fourth decade of life. The disease affects about 10% of persons over the age of 65, and by 85, at least one in four individuals is affl icted. Demographic trends indicate that the elderly comprise the fastest growing segment of the population, and as a consequence, the number of people suffering the devastating impact of Alzheimer's disease is projected to quadruple by 2050. Not surprisingly, efforts to understand the basis of this and related disorders are among the most active research areas in modern neuroscience.Alzheimer's original case study provided an accurate description of the clinical course for many patients with this disease. Impairment in establishing and maintaining memories for recent events is frequently the initial sign that brings the patient to the attention of health care professionals. At this early stage, memory for the remote past is relatively preserved, as are other forms of memory that do not require medial temporal lobe structures. Thus, the neuropsychological profi le of the Alzheimer's patient provides important clues about the neuropathological progression of this disorder, suggesting that the systems responsible for declarative memory are especially vulnerable. Neuroanatomical studies of the diagnostic hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease confi rm this proposal (described in the next section). Progression of the disorder is marked by inexorable decline across multiple cognitive capacities. Although generally alert and responsive in early and middle phases of the disorder, Alzheimer's patients often experience diffi culty identifying the meaning of simple words, uses for common household objects, or the meaning of numbers. Other accompanying disturbances can include general confusion, agitation, delusions, social disinhibition, and paranoia. Language abilities can deteriorate progressively, and at the end stage of disease, patients are often mute and densely amnesic for both recent and more remote events. As might be predicted on the basis of this broad profi le of impairment, the distribution of neuropathology in individuals dying with late-stage Alzheimer's disease is extensive, involving widespread areas of the limbic system and association cortices, along with many subcortical brain regions, including the basal forebrain cholinergic system, striatum, thalamus, and cerebellum.There are two types of neuropathological lesions that, when present in suffi ciently high numbers, are the diagnostic hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease In contrast to extracellular plaques, the second neuropathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease is localized intracellularly. Termed neurofi brillary tangles, these are composed of densely packed, abnormal fi bers that occupy much of the cytoplasm and proximal neuronal processes of affected cells Investigations aimed at mapping the neuroanatomical distribution of pathology during early and later stages of Alzheimer's disease help account for the progression of clinical symptoms in patients with this disorder. Early in the course of the disease, when memory impairment is often the predominant complaint, plaques and tangles are particularly abundant in the entorhinal cortex and associated projection targets in the hippocampus. Indeed, in many cases virtually all of the neurons that originate the perforant path projection to the hippocampus exhibit neurofi brillary tangles. Thus, the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease appears to initially target circuitry critical for normal declarative memory, disrupting a major source of neocortical input that the medial temporal lobe system uses to establish memory for ongoing events. As the severity of cognitive impairment progresses, the distribution of neuropathology becomes more widespread, affecting cortical and subcortical systems that support language, semantic knowledge, abstract reasoning, and other capacities.Important clues about the basis of Alzheimer's disease have come from the study of people affl icted with an "early onset" form of the disorder that emerges before the age of 65. This relatively rare and aggressive condition exhibits an increased prevalence in certain families and therefore is thought to have a signifi cant genetic component. To date, three gene mutations linked to early onset Alzheimer's have been identifi ed: one involving the amyloid precursor protein gene on chromosome 21, another in the presenilin 1 gene on chromosome 14, and the third in the presenilin 2 gene on chromosome 1. Each of these mutations is expressed in an autosomal-dominant fashion such that half the offspring of an affected parent will develop the disease. Importantly, the common thread among gene mutations associated with early onset Alzheimer's disease is that each of them infl uences processing of the amyloid precursor protein Several additional lines of evidence support the suggestion that the deposition of amyloid is central to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. By far the most common form of the disorder (accounting for an estimated 98% of cases) has a relatively late onset, after age 65. Among a number of recently identifi ed candidate genes, one risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease is the allelic composition of the apolipoprotein E gene on chromosome 19 (ApoE); that is, a gene that codes for a glycoprotein involved in cholesterol transport and metabolism. The ApoE gene has three alleles (designated ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4), and patients with Alzheimer's disease carry the ApoE4 allele with a frequency greatly exceeding individuals without the disease. Moreover, the risk of disease is coupled to the number of copies of this specifi c allele: individuals with no copies of ApoE4 are less likely than the general population to develop Alzheimer's disease, the presence of one ApoE4 allele increases the disease risk four times, and people with two copies of ApoE4 are eight times more likely than the population at large to develop Alzheimer's. Although the precise mechanism by which ApoE4 mediates disease susceptibility is the subject of intensive investigation, one hypothesis is that it involves the disruption of processes responsible for scavenging and clearing amyloid peptide from the extracelluar space in brain.Additional fi ndings relevant to the role of amyloid in Alzheimer's disease come from research on Down's syndrome. Down's syndrome results from the presence of an extra copy of the same chromosome that carries the gene for the amyloid precursor protein; chromosome 21. Thus, it is of considerable interest that people with Down's syndrome who survive until the fourth decade of life invariably develop a distribution of amyloid plaques in the brain similar to that observed in Alzheimer's patients. To the degree that aberrant processing or clearance of amyloid comprises the single common pathogenic mechanism of Alzheimer's disease, current fi ndings encourage the view that interventions targeting this pathway might be developed to prevent or reverse this defect, realizing an effective treatment for the most common cause of age-related dementia.Although Alzheimer's disease is presently incurable, several pharmacological treatments have been approved for the clinical management of cognitive impairment associated with the disorder. These interventions all target the function of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Although available treatments offer modest, transient benefi t for certain Alzheimer's patients, they fall far short of an effective cure or prevention. Encouraging preliminary progress toward the latter goal is based on the proposal that aberrant amyloid deposition represents the central pathogenic event responsible for the disorder. Whereas laboratory animals fail to develop Alzheimer's disease spontaneously, one can take advantage of a transgenic mouse model that accumulates amyloid-containing plaques in an age-dependent manner. These mice also develop spatial learning defi cits relatively early in life, in temporal correspondence with the emergence of amyloid deposits. When transgenic animals were vaccinated at multiple time points during the fi rst four months of life with Ab, and subsequently examined for the effects of immunization on behavior and neuropathology, treatment attenuated the spatial learning defi cits substantially Related fi ndings using a similar experimental approach also demonstrate that immunization with Ab is even effective in reducing the degree and progression of amyloid deposition when provided to older animals at a point in the life span when this pathology is already well established This chapter has considered the neurobiological basis of cognitive development and aging. Early cognitive development is marked by the emergence of a remarkably complex set of adaptive capacities, including language skills, reasoning abilities, attention, declarative memory, and executive functions. The vast majority of neurons-the essential building blocks of the central nervous system-are present at birth in humans, and rather than depending on the recruitment of new neurons, cognitive development appears to involve the fi ne tuning and establishment of appropriate circuitry among existing cells. Given this complex orchestration of processes, it is not surprising that many major disorders affecting cognitive function appear to result from a disruption of normal neurodevelopmental events. Higher order cognitive capacities are also vulnerable to deterioration during normal aging. Whereas widely distributed neuron death was previously presumed to underlie these defi cits, it now appears that regionally selective changes in connectivity and cell biological function in critical circuits are the causative factors. Aging is also associated with some of the most devastating pathological conditions affecting cognitive function, including Alzheimer's disease. The dramatic progress realized in recent years, for the fi rst time, has established a basis for the rationale development of strategies for disease prevention and treatment.Accurate perception and recognition of objects is a crucial ability for visually dependent organisms such as humans-but it is also a complex one. As object and viewer move with respect to one another, the images cast by the object on the retinas of the observer can change radically. Not only will image position and size change, but surfaces may be foreshortened, occluded, or newly revealed. Similarly, changes in ambient illumination can reveal new surfaces, hide others in shadow, or introduce spurious edges where light ends and shadow begins. Despite this, human and nonhuman primates recognize objects quite accurately. This means that the visual system is able to extract a reasonably constant "representation" for the shapes and identities of meaningful objects despite such transformations. Image processing by the retina, visual thalamus, and primary visual cortex begins this process by extracting features and representing them over progressively larger receptive fi elds. However, in order to understand how the brain represents the identity of an object-its defi ning, invariant features of shape, relations among parts, and its signifi cance-one must examine how circuits beyond the primary visual cortex encode and retain crucial information of a more global or "high-level" nature.Visual processing can be subdivided into low-level, intermediate-level, and high-level components. The initial, low-level stages are those in which the brain extracts information about the physical properties of the stimulus, such as the edges, brightness, color, and motion of objects present in scenes This chapter is concerned primarily with the neural basis of the high-level components of object vision. First, historical evidence is reviewed that helped localize the crucial circuitry involved to the ventral parts of the temporal lobes. Next, from studies in nonhuman primates, the main pathways are described for object perception and recognition, in addition to neural codes that lead to object vision. Then, neuroimaging and electrophysiological studies are reviewed to show that very similar processing pathways and mechanisms exist in humans. In addition, human studies are reviewed to consider how the brain may treat special categories of objects and the ways in which experience with objects tunes their neural representations. Finally, visual object perception is considered in the broader context of general object knowledge and memory. The earliest clues about the neural bases of object perception and recognition came from the study of brain-damaged humans with visual agnosia. Visual agnosia refers to a set of disorders affecting object recognition, in which elementary visual capacities such as acuity and visual fi elds are preserved or grossly intact (for review, see Lissauer is credited with the fi rst detailed discussion of visual agnosia in 1890. He distinguished between two types, which he termed apperceptive and associative; these terms are still used commonly today. Agnosic patients, whose elementary perception of shape is impaired (despite intact or roughly normal visual acuity), are classifi ed as apperceptive agnosics because their impairment is presumed to be at an early stage of the perceptual processing needed for object recognition. Patients with such defi cits are relatively rare. Usually they have suffered diffuse brain damage, often from carbon monoxide poisoning, as opposed to the more localized damage to posterior cortex and inferior temporal regions seen in the majority of agnosics. Agnosics whose elementary shape perception is grossly intact are classifi ed as associative agnosics, following Lissauer's contention that they cannot associate a percept with its meaning (i.e., its visual representation stored in memory).Although the notion that these latter patients show a defi cit in association per se has been called into question, the impairments they show reveal critical features of how the object recognition system tends to break down. To be considered an associative visual agnosic, the patient is tested to determine the presence of the following features. First, the patient must show diffi culty recognizing visually presented objects, as measured by both naming and nonverbal tests of recognition, such as sorting objects by category (e.g., grouping kitchen utensils together, separate from sports equipment) or pantomiming the uses of the object. Second, the patient must show knowledge of the objects through sensory modalities other than vision; that is, be able to recognize items by sound or touch or through verbal questioning ("What is an egg beater?"). Third, the patient must have sensory and perceptual capacity suffi cient to allow him or her to describe the appearance of an unrecognized object, to draw it, or identify whether it is the same as or different from a second item. An illustrative case of associative visual agnosia is summarized in Box 46.1. The subject was a 47-year-old man who had suffered an acute loss of blood pressure with resulting brain damage. His mental status and language abilities were normal, and his visual acuity was 20/30, with a right homonymous hemianopia (blindness in the right visual hemifi eld). His one severe impairment was an inability to recognize most visual stimuli. For the fi rst three weeks in the hospital, the patient could not identify common objects presented visually and did not know what was on his plate until he tasted it. He identifi ed objects immediately on touching them.When shown a stethoscope, he described it as "a long cord with a round thing at the end" and asked if it could be a watch. He identifi ed a can opener as a key. Asked to name a cigarette lighter, he said, "I don't know" but named it after the examiner lit it. He said he was "not sure" when shown a toothbrush. He was never able to describe or demonstrate the use of an object if he could not name it. If he misnamed an object, his demonstration of use would correspond to the mistaken identifi cation. Identifi cation improved very slightly when given the category of the object (e.g., something to eat) or when asked to point to a named object instead of being required to give the name. When told the correct name of an object, he usually responded with a quick nod and often said, "Yes, I see it now." Then, often he could point out various parts of the previously unrecognized item as readily as a normal subject (e.g., the stem and bowl of a pipe and the laces, sole, and heel of a shoe). However, if asked by the examiner, "Suppose I told you that the last object was not really a pipe, what would you say?" He would reply, "I would take your word for it. Perhaps it's not a pipe." Similar vacillation never occurred with tactilely or aurally identifi ed objects.After he had spent three weeks on the ward, his object naming ability improved so that he could name many common objects, but this was variable; he might correctly name an object at one time and misname it later. Performance deteriorated severely when any part of the object was covered by the examiner. He could match identical objects but could not group objects by categories (clothing, food). He could draw the outlines of objects (key, spoon, etc.) that he could not identify.He was unable to recognize members of his family, the hospital staff, or even his own face in the mirror. Sometimes he had diffi culty distinguishing a line drawing of an animal face from a man's face but always recognized it as a face. The ability to recognize pictures of objects was impaired greatly, and after repeated testing he could name only one or two of 10 line drawings. He was always able to name geometrical forms (circle, square, triangle, cube). Remarkably, he could make excellent copies of line drawings and still fail to name the subject. He easily matched drawings of objects that he could not identify and had no diffi culty discriminating between complex nonrepresentational patterns, differing from each other only subtly. He occasionally failed in discriminating because he included imperfections in the paper or in the printer's ink. He could never group drawings of objects by class unless he could fi rst name the subject. Reading, both aloud and for comprehension, was limited greatly. He could read, hesitantly, most printed letters but often misread "K" as "R," and "L" as "T," and vice versa. He was able to read words slowly by spelling them aloud.Excerpted from nevertheless did not recognize the pictures he copied.Closer examination of the manner in which agnosics copy and match pictures they cannot identify shows that they are often abnormally attentive to the small details of the image, rather than being guided by the overall shape or "gestalt" of the object itself. This copying is done in a slow, line-by-line fashion, and patients may classify two pictures as different because of a small fl aw in the printing. These observations suggest that the associative agnosic patients are unable to match what is in front of them to a unifi ed, stored visual representation of the object. Such stored representations likely include knowledge about the invariant, distinguishing visual attributes (such as the general body shape and relative placement of features of the pig in Ablation studies in monkeys have (1) confi rmed the crucial role of the temporal lobes in visual object perception and recognition, and (2) clarifi ed the nature of the visual representations used in the object recognition process. One of the earliest experimental studies on the role of the temporal cortex in visual recognition was that of Klüver and Bucy, who described in the 1930s what is now known as the Klüver-Bucy syndrome. When these researchers removed the temporal lobes of monkeys bilaterally, the monkeys demonstrated complex changes in visual, social, sexual, and eating behavior. These changes appeared to result from a combination of perceptual, memory, and motivational impairments. Subsequent research eventually identifi ed the region now known as inferior temporal (IT) cortex as the critical area for producing the visual component of the syndrome. Monkeys with bilateral IT lesions are impaired both in learning to distinguish between different visual patterns or objects, and in retaining previously acquired visual discriminations. What type of stimulus representation is impaired after IT lesions? A great deal of research been devoted to this question. Generally, such experiments measure whether monkeys can discriminate different stimuli, before and after experimental lesions in IT cortex-and from any such differences, object-processing mechanisms are inferred. A current summary might be that the IT cortex represents aspects of the intrinsic shape of the stimulus that are useful for recognition (e.g., the salient features in a face and their relative positions), generalizing across idiosyncratic aspects of stimulus appearance that depend on specifi c viewing conditions (see later).Position in the visual fi eld (retinotopy) is one of these specifi c visual properties that is independent of object identity, and normal monkeys will easily generalize a visual discrimination learned in one part of the visual fi eld to the other. For example, if monkeys learn to tell apart stimuli in one half of visual space, they will easily be able to perform the discrimination when the same stimuli are presented to the other half of visual space. However, monkeys with IT lesions are impaired at this generalization; presumably they have lost representations that are invariant across visual fi eld locations. Retinal image size of a stimulus is a related visual property that depends on viewing conditions and not just intrinsic object geometry, and this is another perceptual distinction that is diffi cult for monkeys with IT lesions. For example, monkeys trained to discriminate between two disks of different absolute sizes are unable to perform the discrimination when those disks are presented at variable distances (hence with variable retinal image sizes). Instead, they respond on the basis of retinal size or distance. This result implies that representations within IT cortex normally encode the absolute size of an object, an intrinsic object property useful for recognition, rather than its distance per se or its retinal image size. Finally, variations in illumination prevent monkeys with IT FIGURE 46.2 Pictures that a patient with associative visual agnosia did not recognize but was able to copy. Asterisks indicate the patient's copies. From Studies of brain damage in humans, and experimental lesions in monkeys, both point to the crucial role of the inferior temporal cortex during object perception and recognition. In both species, analysis of the ensuing defi cits suggests that this region participates in creating and storing neural representations of the defi ning features and invariant aspects that identify a visual object or class of objects.Much of our detailed knowledge of visual cortical organization derives from studies of Old World monkeys of the genus Macaca. Similar regions and processing stages are now known to exist in both New World species (Chapter 44) and in humans, as described later in this chapter. The original evidence that the visual cortex is divided into separate processing streams was based on the contrasting effects of inferior temporal and posterior parietal cortex lesions in monkeys. For example, inferior temporal lesions cause severe defi cits in visual discrimination tasks, but they do not affect animals' performance on visuospatial tasks (e.g., visually guided reaching and judging which of two objects lies closer to a visual landmark). In contrast, parietal lesions do not affect visual discrimination ability but instead cause severe defi cits on visuospatial performance. On the basis of behavioral results such as these,  proposed the existence of two processing streams: an occipitotemporal or ventral processing stream for mediating the visual recognition of objects ("what" an object is) and an occipitoparietal or dorsal processing stream for mediating the appreciation of the spatial relationships among objects and the visual guidance toward them ("where" an object is). As described in Chapter 27, physiological studies of cell properties also support the functional distinction between ventral and dorsal pathways. Neurons within the ventral stream (in distinct modules within V1 and V2, area V4, and inferior temporal areas TEO and TE) respond selectively to visual features relevant for object identifi cation, such as color, shape, and texture. Neurons within the dorsal stream (in other modules within with V1 and V2, areas V3, V3A, middle temporal area MT, medial superior temporal area MST, and additional areas in inferior parietal cortex) instead respond selectively to spatial aspects of stimuli, such as the direction and speed of stimulus motion. Such cells also respond when the animal visually tracks a moving target. The remainder of this section describes the anatomy of the occipitotemporal pathway for object recognition.In both monkeys and humans, cortical regions comprising the object recognition pathway lie directly adjacent to the primary visual cortex (V1) in the occipital lobe, extending progressively into more anterior and ventral portions of the temporal lobe. Progressing forward along the occipitotemporal pathway from V1 to TE, there is a gradual shift in the nature of connectivity, which is signifi cant for the VISUAL PATHWAYS FOR OBJECT PROCESSING IN NONHUMAN PRIMATES eventual extraction of invariant object features. At successive stages, patterns of cortical projections become successively less topographic or "point to point." While connections from V1 to V2 maintain topographic order, the organization becomes looser between V2 and V4, and inputs to area TE from V4 and TEO retain no obvious retinotopic organization. Likewise, pathways interconnecting areas of the ventral stream on the two sides of the brain via the corpus callosum and/or the anterior commissure tend to be restricted to the representation of the midline of visual space early in the pathway, but their representation becomes more widespread at higher levels in the pathway. This loss of retinotopy within area TE means that single neurons respond to objects anywhere in the visual fi eld. This evidence suggests that the initial explicit information about spatial position in the visual fi eld ("retinotopy") has been converted to information about object identity, in at least some parts of IT cortex.However, neural processing in the object recognition pathway is not a simple elaboration of information from lower order to higher order areas. At all stages, the neural connections are reciprocal, such that an area receiving feedforward projections from an area earlier in the ventral stream also provides feedback projections to that area. Long-range nonreciprocal connections, such as from area TE back to V1, also exist. On the one hand, feedforward projections provide bottom-up, sensory-driven inputs to subsequent visual areas, and severing these projections disconnects subsequent areas from their visual input. On the other hand, the precise functions of reciprocal, feedback projections are still unknown. Probably these feedback projections play a top-down role in vision (as in selective attention) by modulating activity in earlier areas of the ventral pathway (Chapter 48). In addition to feedforward and feedback projections, there also appear to be "intermediate-type" projections that link areas at the same level of the visual hierarchy. These are seen most notably between areas of the dorsal and ventral streams. For example, area V4 is interconnected with motion-sensitive areas MT and MST. Thus, an anatomical substrate exists for interactions between the two processing streams, and these might serve to integrate what an object is with where an object is.All areas within the ventral stream also have heavy interconnections with subcortical structures, notably the pulvinar, claustrum, and basal ganglia. In addition, each ventral stream area also receives subcortical modulatory inputs from ascending cholinergic projections from the basal forebrain, and ascending noradrenergic projections from the locus coeruleus. These projections are thought to play a role in the storage of information in the cortex, and the infl uence of arousal on information processing, respectively. Finally, visual information is sent from IT cortex to the most ventral and anterior reaches of the temporal lobe, notably the perirhinal cortex and parahippocampal areas TF and TH. These regions in turn project, via the entorhinal cortex, to medial temporal lobe structures, such as the hippocampus, which contribute to forming long-term memories of visual objects and their contexts (Chapter 50). Information is also sent from IT cortex to the prefrontal cortex, which plays an important role in working memory, holding an object briefl y in mind when it is no longer visible (Chapter 52). Finally, there are direct projections from IT cortex to the amygdala, which is important for attaching emotional valence to a stimulus (Chapter 50).Areas along the occipitotemporal pathway of the monkey are organized hierarchically proceeding from V1 > V2 > V4 > TEO > TE. At progressively higher stages of this hierarchy, there is a corresponding loss (or conversion) of retinotopic information, such that information about the spatial location of the object is gradually changed. In addition to this bottom-up information (supplied by feedforward projections from lower order to higher order visual areas within this pathway), there are also reciprocal, feedback projections from higher order to lower order visual areas. These latter projections are thought to play a top-down role in vision.  . According to this model, there are two major processing pathways, or "streams," in the visual cortex, both originating in the primary visual cortex: a ventral stream, directed into the temporal lobe and crucial for the identifi cation of objects, and a dorsal stream, directed into the parietal lobe and crucial for spatial perception and visuomotor performance. The shaded region indicates the extent of the visual cortex in the monkey, and the labels (OC, OB, OA, TEO, TE, PG) indicate cytoarchitectonic areas according to the nomenclature of von Bonin and Bailey. Adapted from The different cortical areas in the occipitotemporal pathway share a number of physiological characteristics. Consistent with a role in object recognition, all areas in the pathway contain populations of cells sensitive to the shape, color, and/or texture of visual stimuli. However, at progressively higher levels, cells have larger receptive fi elds and their stimulus selectivity is more complex to characterize. Thus, higher order properties (consistent with invariant representation of objects) usually are attributed to cells in higher tier areas. For instance, many V1 neurons function as local spatial fi lters, signaling the presence of contours at particular positions and orientations in the visual fi eld. In contrast, an increasingly higher proportion of cells in higher tier areas (e.g., V2 and beyond) apparently respond to illusory contours (i.e., contours implied by stimulus context and higher-order properties, not due to simple light-dark contrast), across increasingly larger regions of the visual fi eld.Additional higher-order, object-related properties are also seen at higher tier cortical levels. One of these properties is increasing stimulus invariance, namely, similar shape selectivity despite variations in the type of lower-order cues used to generate the shape (such as luminance, color, motion, etc). Another of these properties is increasingly strong, silent suppressive zones surrounding the classical, excitatory receptive fi eld of cells. These zones are called silent because visual stimulation of them normally does not cause any change from the baseline activity of the cellsalthough it can nevertheless powerfully affect responses to a stimulus placed in the classical receptive fi eld. For example, many V4 cells respond maximally to a stimulus only if it stands out from its background based on differences in form-as in the well-known perceptual phenomenon of fi gure/ground segregation, a computation that remains diffi cult to achieve in machinebased object recognition.Farther forward in area TEO of the occipitotemporal pathway, and then into posterior and anterior portions of area TE, there are further increases in the complexity of the critical features needed to activate many neurons, and relative increases in the proportion of cells that are selectively driven by some kind of complex pattern or object This experimental problem is related to the idea, developed sometime in the late 1960s, that every object would be coded by maximal fi ring in a single cell in IT cortex; this was termed the "grandmother cell" hypothesis because each "grandmother" was thought to cause maximal fi ring in a single cell This latter idea is supported by evidence suggesting that IT cells are anatomically grouped into functionally similar patches, columns, or areas (see later). Based on fi ndings from single-unit and optical recording, Thus, a given object is apparently not represented by the activity of a single cell, but by the activity of many cells across different columns or regions. This unique-but-overlapping population code satisfi es two otherwise confl icting requirements in visual recognition: robustness to subtle changes in input, and precision of representation. Although the image of an object projected on the retina changes in response to variations in illumination and viewing angle, the pattern of activity in IT cortex will be largely maintained, insofar as the clustering of cells with overlapping but slightly different selectivity serve as a buffer to absorb such changes.One of the more striking characteristics of monkey temporal cortex is the presence of neurons with responses selective for face stimuli, fi rst described by Face-selective cells vary in the degree and nature of their preference for face stimuli. Many respond well to both real faces or face pictures, but give little or no response to any other stimuli tested, including other complex objects, texture patterns, and images in which the features making up the face are rearranged or scrambled One subset of face-selective cells appears especially sensitive to the direction of gaze of the eyes (looking back directly or turned to the side), which is an important social signal for both monkeys and humans. Other neurons apparently respond selectively to biological motion; that is, motion patterns consistent with what one sees when one observes the gait of another animal. Such cells respond when viewing a monkey or human walking, or to equivalent motion patterns generated by so-called Johanssen point-light stimuli (i.e., stimuli generated by attaching lights to the joints of a moving animal, which is otherwise in the dark).Together, these observations have led to the proposal that the primate temporal lobe has evolved specialized mechanisms for the encoding and recognition of biologically signifi cant stimuli, especially faces. Are such regions innate, or recruited and trained as a result of experience? This is another form of the classical nature-versus-nurture question. Some evidence (e.g., preferential looking at faces in newborns) suggests that face-selectivity may indeed be innate. Alternative interpretations of such category-specifi c phenomena also are discussed later, which take into account the learning history of the individual.As suggested at the start of the chapter, visual information impinging on the retina is a two-dimensional projection of a three-dimensional world-a projection that varies dramatically due to changes in the position, distance, illumination, and orientation of an object relative to the viewer. Thus, the function of the occipitotemporal pathway can be defi ned in large measure as determining and encoding those invariant features of objects that are useful for recognition across myriad circumstances. Exactly how this might be accomplished is unclear even at a theoretical level. However, several fi ndings suggest how this process might at least begin.As described earlier, as one progresses forward from V1 to TE, receptive fi elds become larger and the retinotopic maps less precise. By area TE, receptive fi elds are large and bilateral, typically encompassing the central 20° or more-up to the entire visual fi eld in far anterior TE. As we have seen, the large receptive fi elds of TE neurons signal the presence of a given feature, collection of features, or object, regardless of where they fall in the visual fi eld. In other words, they exhibit invariance of stimulus coding across changes in retinal position.In addition to invariance over retinal position, many neurons in TE show maintained selectivity for their "preferred" stimuli over more complex kinds of transformations, such as size, distance from the subject in depth, or degree of ambient illumination; thus, they show invariance over a number of the changes that normally take place as a moving object is viewed under naturalistic conditions. Also, many TE neurons show form-cue invariance: for example, a neuron selective for a particular shape defi ned by luminance borders (e.g., a white star on a black background) will also respond selectively to the same form when it is instead defi ned by relative texture and motion cues (e.g., a star-shaped region of speckles of the same average luminance as the background, moving in a direction different from the background). Taken together, these various types of response invariance or generalization can explain the various defi cits seen in experimental monkeys when IT cortex is removed, as described earlier.As discussed in Box 46.2, one central question in object recognition has been the degree to which neural representations of objects are object-centered (view independent) or viewer-centered (view dependent). The question of view dependence has been addressed by a number of single-unit studies of neurons in TE. For example, in one study, monkeys were trained to recognize specifi c novel three-dimensional objects from any viewpoint after experience with a few prototypical views in a discrimination task The previous sections illustrate how the object recognition pathway, especially area TE, represents features that are useful for recognition. For example, some neurons respond selectively to the salient features in a face, or their relative positions, while ignoring aspects of stimulus appearance that depend on viewing Although we know something of the underlying anatomy and physiology, the mechanisms by which object recognition actually is accomplished by the brain have been a matter of heated debate. The pioneering theoretical work of Marr in the late 1970s set the stage for current theories, which can be divided into two main groups: object-centered (view independent), and viewercentered (view dependent) theories.According to object-centered accounts, objects are represented in the brain as hierarchies of parts that are, to a large degree, independent of any particular viewpoint. One of the best known examples is Biederman's (1990) recognition by components (RBC), which postulates that objects can be defi ned as a set of 30 or so primitive shapes, so-called geons. In this theory, geons are threedimensional component building blocks, which, when combined, form the objects that we know ( Viewer-centered theories, however, suggest that recognition is linked to the appearance of objects as originally seen. In other words, the brain is not thought of as storing a central, invariant representation of an object, but instead as storing information from multiple independent views (e.g., a view of the telephone as in the fi gure, but also an end-on or side view, a view from above, etc.). A potential problem with this idea is that it might seem that for reliable object recognition, stored representations for all views of objects would need to exist. The solution is to suggest that a small set of characteristic or prototypical views would suffi ce. Proponents of this approach have offered a variety of different theoretical normalization mechanisms for generalizing from unfamiliar views to the familiar, prototypical stored views At fi rst glance, object-centered theories appear more compelling, as they attempt at the outset to solve the central problem associated with object recognition, namely reliable recognition despite variation in the precise retinal image. However, one serious challenge is how the brain chooses the correct structural interpretation among the possible ones, as a given set of geons may be compatible with several different objects. Psychophysical testing also indicates that object-centered encoding is not the whole story; studies have shown substantial and robust viewpoint effects even for extremely simple three-dimensional volumes resembling proposed geon primitives.However, viewer-centered approaches also face challenges. Viewer-centered theories have been most successful in accounting for exemplar-level recognition; that is, discriminating between individual visually similar objects within a relatively homogeneous class of objects such as faces, cars, or birds. Though recognition at the exemplar level is often important, there is little question that socalled class-level recognition actually constitutes much of the job of recognition. For example, for objects such as chairs, telephones, and toasters, we rarely need to discriminate two instances of the class and instead we learn to recognize such objects at a basic category or class level. Viewer-centered models suggest that the brain represents the appearance of a specifi c individual example of an object from specifi c viewpoints, and thus seem unsuitable or unnecessary for class-level recognition. Moreover, even for a single exemplar, it is uncertain how many prototypical views are enough for robust recognition. One solution would be to store as many views of an object as possible so that new views would always be similarenough to some previously stored view. However, it is unclear that there can ever be suffi cient memory to do so for all the objects that the observer becomes profi cient at recognizing under varied conditions.  conditions, such as absolute size and luminance. However, in ecological terms, what is useful and salient within the image of an object or scene changes with experience and context, and these changes are refl ected in the way the brain represents stimuli over time. Neurons in IT cortex and the adjacent perirhinal cortex show effects of both recent viewing history and longterm experience with stimuli. Experiments by Experiments such as these demonstrate that the magnitude of neuronal responses can be affected by the experience of the subject with the stimulus and by its signifi cance, at least in the short term. Other studies suggest that the kind of familiarity gained over longer periods of time-akin to the development of "expertise" as discussed later in the chapter-can also be refl ected in the responses of TE cells. For example, in monkeys that have been trained for as long as a year to discriminate between objects, more than 30% of the cells show selectivity for those objects compared to untrained monkeys in which roughly 10% of the cells show such selectivity Intriguingly, some TE and perirhinal cells can represent the history of association between objects in the activity patterns they exhibit in response to members of a set of stimuli. Some research groups have examined mechanisms of visual memory by using pairedassociate tasks, in which monkeys are trained to associate arbitrary patterns with one another for reward. In one experiment, monkeys were fi rst shown one member of a learned pair and then were required to choose the associated "match" from a display of two stimuli while single-unit activity was recorded in ante-rior IT cortex Although associative learning effects typically have been seen in studies after weeks or months of training, there is evidence that small but detectable shifts in neuronal population selectivity occur after only a day or so of experience; this suggests that TE cells tend to develop pair-coding properties more rapidly than previously thought At successive levels of processing along the occipitotemporal pathway, increasingly complex kinds of information about objects are extracted. In area TE of IT cortex, some neurons are preferentially responsive to faces and other biologically signifi cant stimuli. In addition, TE neurons apparently extract some invariant aspects of objects. For example, TE neurons show similar selectivity for object shape, regardless of large changes in their retinal position, size, distance in depth, and degree of ambient illumination. Finally, as the result of experience, some TE neurons come to represent novel objects and/or the associative relations between objects.On each trial, the monkey was shown a sample stimulus, and then between zero and four intervening nonmatching items appeared before the matching stimulus was presented. Repeated nonmatches appeared after zero (as shown) or one intervening stimulus between them. The task of the monkey was to respond to the matching test stimulus and ignore repeated nonmatches. (B) Responses of a neuron to a single stimulus appearing as a match, nonmatch, and repeated nonmatch. Horizontal bars under the histograms indicated when the stimuli were on, which was 500 ms for nonmatch and repeated nonmatch stimuli. The match stimulus was terminated when the animal made its response. Results show mnemonic enhancement to the match stimulus but not to a stimulus that repeats but is not held in mind (i.e., repeated nonmatch). Adapted from The differential visual impairments produced by focal lesions in clinical cases suggest that the human visual cortex, like that of the monkey, contains two anatomically distinct and functionally specialized pathways: the ventral and dorsal streams. For example, one study demonstrated a double dissociation of visual recognition (face perception camoufl aged by shadows) and visuospatial performance (maze learning) in two men with lesions of the occipitotemporal and occipitoparietal cortex, respectively, confi rmed by postmortem examination The development of functional brain imaging, including PET (positron emission tomography) and fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging), has made it possible to map the organization of the human visual cortex with far greater precision than is possible with human lesion studies, and without the confounding infl uence of compensatory responses to brain injury. For instance Haxby and colleagues Functional neuroimaging studies have also revealed a number of distinct visual areas within the ventral and dorsal streams in humans. Many of these areas appear to be equivalent (and perhaps homologous) to specifi c monkey visual areas, including V1, V2, V3, V3A, V4v, and the middle temporal area (MT) (see also As described earlier, receptive fi eld size increases, and stimulus requirements become more stringent, as one progresses from V1 through various stages of the ventral stream. For instance, single units in macaque IT cortex do not respond to "scrambled" versions of object images (e.g., A number of fMRI fi ndings suggest that the LOC is an important stage in human object processing. First, whereas early visual areas V1-V3 respond similarly to intact, recognizable stimuli and highly scrambled, unrecognizable pictures (scrambled pictures tend to elicit even stronger responses), the LOC exhibits a high sensitivity to image scrambling (in fact, the LOC often is defi ned by contrasting objects to scrambled objects). Second, a fourfold change in visual object size does not affect the LOC activation, although it changes some stimulus properties greatly (e.g., local contrast); responses in the LOC also exhibit some invariance to changes in image position. Third, the LOC responds FIGURE 46.8 Ventral and dorsal processing streams in the human cortex, as demonstrated in a PET imaging study of face and location perception. (A) Sample stimuli used during the experiment. (Left) Stimuli for both face and location matching tasks. During face matching trials, subjects had to indicate with a button press which of the two faces at the bottom was the same person shown at the top. In this example, the correct choice is the stimulus on the right. During location matching trials, subjects had to indicate with a button press which of the two small squares at the bottom was in the same location relative to the double line as the small square shown at the top. In this example, the correct choice is the stimulus on the left. (Right) Control stimuli. During control trials, subjects saw an array of three stimuli in which the small squares contained a complex visual image. In these trials, which controlled for both visual stimulation and fi nger movements, they alternated left and right button presses. (B) Areas shown in red had signifi cantly increased activity during the face matching but not during the location matching task, as compared with activity during the control task. Areas shown in green had signifi cantly increased activity during the location matching but not during the face matching task, as compared with activity during the control task. Areas shown in yellow had signifi cantly increased activity during both face and location matching tasks. Adapted from to multiple visual cues. For example, the shape of an object can be defi ned by luminance, by texture, or by motion cues alone; objects defi ned by any one or more of these cues reliably evoke responses in the LOC. Fourth, objects that vary widely in their recognizability (e.g., famous faces and unfamiliar threedimensional abstract sculptures) produce similar activations in the LOC. Together, these fi ndings indicate that the LOC is an intermediate link in the processing of objects; that is, a stage following low-level processing and preceding object processing stages that involve memory.Although the processing of general object shape observed in the LOC appears to be important for object perception and recognition, the LOC probably is not responsible for object recognition per se. Whereas the LOC responds to essentially any three-dimensional shape, areas in the ventral stream anterior to the LOC, most notably on the fusiform gyrus in the ventral temporal cortex, respond preferentially to recognizable objects. It therefore is thought that object recognition is critically dependent on the ventral temporal cortex. Indeed, as later sections describe, it is likely that the storage of object representations takes place in the ventral temporal cortex as well. The next section considers the processing of specifi c categories of objects and the functional architecture of the ventral temporal cortex.Evidence from lesion studies and neuroimaging studies confi rms the existence in humans, as in macaques, of two visual processing pathways: a ventral stream for object vision and a dorsal stream for spatial vision. Within the ventral stream, early visual areas, including V1-V4, are organized retinotopically and appear to be homologous to areas studied in monkeys. The LOC appears to play an important role at the next stage of processing, where general object shape is processed. Activation of the LOC is highly sensitive to image scrambling, but less sensitive to variations in image size or the visual cues that defi ne the shape of an object. Activation of the LOC, however, is not sensitive to object recognizability, sug-FIGURE 46.9 Shape processing in the lateral occipital cortex (LOC). (Top) Visual stimuli that were used to investigate the effects of image scrambling on activity in the LOC, as measured by fMRI. Subjects viewed the stimuli and were instructed to covertly name them, even the scrambled images. Stimulus 1 is the original image, and stimuli 2-5 are increasingly scrambled. (Bottom) fMRI time series illustrating the averaged activations in V1 and the LOC to each of the images shown at the top. Note that LOC is very sensitive to image scrambling, whereas V1 is not. Adapted from Evidence from neuropsychology and neurophysiology suggests that certain kinds of objects may have special signifi cance to primates. Prosopagnosia, a selective defi cit in recognizing familiar faces, has been known since at least the end of the nineteenth century. Although patients with this syndrome are aware that faces are faces (i.e., they know the basic stimulus category), they fail to reliably identify (or even achieve a sense of familiarity from) the faces of coworkers, family members, famous persons, and other individuals previously well known to them. Typically, prosopagnosics also have trouble forming memories of new faces, even if other new objects can be learned. Because the voice of a visually unrecognized person usually enables the patient to identify and feel familiar with that person, prosopagnosia (face agnosia) appears to be a specifically visual impairment.A number of explanations have been offered for the apparent selectivity of the prosopagnosic defi cit. One explanation is that face perception and recognition are indeed unique behavioral capacities and refl ect unique, dedicated neural circuits that can be selectively damaged. Such dedicated neural circuits may have developed through evolution due to the biological signifi cance of faces and facial expressions for social communication. A second explanation suggests that face processing refl ects subtle and diffi cult discriminations between highly similar exemplars within a category and that it is this general capacity, not the processing of the facial confi guration per se, that is disrupted in prosopagnosia. This second view is consistent with the observation that prosopagnosia often is accompanied by varying levels of object agnosia. A third, and related, suggestion (see later) is that face processing represents the acquisition of a type of expertise derived from very protracted experience with a category of complex visual stimuli. Reports of persons with prosopagnosia who have associated defi cits in types of object recognition in which they had previously acquired expertise over long periods of time (e.g., a show dog expert who lost the ability to differentiate breeds) are consistent with this idea. Note that the second view may be considered as a specifi c form of the expertise hypothesis.Since the 1980s, a number of cases with prosopagnosia have come to autopsy. The damage common to these lay within the lingual and fusiform gyri Several recent reports of developmental prosopagnosia have provided invaluable information concerning the perceptual defi cit observed in these patients. Developmental prosopagnosia is characterized by severely impaired face recognition in individuals with no detectable brain damage (i.e., presumably intact visual systems). Many developmental prosopagnosics have normal or relatively good object recognition, indicating that their impairments are not the result of defi cits to a unitary visual recognition mechanism. Indeed, extensive testing of particular individuals has revealed especially pure face processing defi cits The existence of prosopagnosia suggests that certain regions of the ventral stream should be very responsive to faces. This is exactly what has been observed in neuroimaging studies. For example, a number of early neuroimaging studies revealed that a region on the fusiform gyrus of the right hemisphere is signifi cantly more active when subjects view faces, compared to when they view common nonface objects. This region was called the "fusiform face area" (FFA) by Kanwisher and colleagues Furthermore, the face selectivity of the FFA has been linked closely to conscious face perception in humans. In one neuroimaging study, the differential sensitivity of the ventral cortex to different visual stimuli was explored in a binocular rivalry paradigm in which different stimuli (faces and houses) were presented to the right and left eyes Evidence from electrophysiological recordings in patients with implanted electrodes (as part of the preparation for neurosurgery to treat epilepsy) also reveals face-selective processing in the ventral stream In other small, circumscribed locations in the ventral occipitotemporal cortex, N200 potentials are elicited selectively by visual stimuli other than faces, such as letter strings (including words and nonwords), numbers, complex objects, and gratings. Importantly, the responses are not elicited by control stimuli, such as scrambled versions of the stimuli. The small regions, which vary in their exact location among individuals, are reminiscent of clumps of object-selective neurons found in area TE of monkeys.In addition to faces, other visually complex and behaviorally important classes of stimuli may also FIGURE 46.11 Design and results from an fMRI experiment on binocular rivalry. (A) The top illustration shows the ambiguous face/house stimulus used to produce rivalry. When viewed through red and green fi lter glasses, only the face could be seen through one eye and only the house through the other eye. This arrangement led to binocular rivalry, with a face percept alternating with a house percept every few seconds. (B) Two adjacent axial slices through the brain of a single subject showing, in the left slice, the area on the fusiform gyrus that responded more to faces than houses (FFA) and, in the right slice, the area on the parahippocampal gyrus that responded more to houses than to faces (PPA). In the slices shown, left is the right hemisphere and right is the left hemisphere. (C) fMRI time series showing FFA and PPA activity for a single subject illustrating that the activity in these two regions correlated with the subject's visual percept. PPA, parahippocampal place area. Adapted from Neuroimaging studies have revealed a region within the human parahippocampal cortex that is significantly more active when subjects view complex scenes (such as rooms, landscapes, and city streets) than when they view objects, faces, or other kinds of visual stimuli. This region has been named the parahippocampal place area (PPA) because it responds strongly whenever subjects view an image of a place Recent fi ndings also suggest that some extrastriate visual areas may respond selectively when viewing human body parts (such as an isolated foot or arm) relative to viewing objects (including man-made objects and food). The region that is activated is located in the lateral occipitotemporal cortex (near the middle occipital gyrus) in an area that does not appear to have evident retinotopy. Continuing with the tradition of naming regions, this region has been called the extrastriate body area (EBA; Finally, studies of brain lesions in patients suggest that there is a specialized region for the processing of written words in the inferior temporal lobe. Patients with alexia cannot read normally despite intact visual capabilities, and despite their ability to understand spoken language and to write. Accordingly, alexia has been conceptualized as essentially a visual agnosia for verbal material. Studies investigating the neural substrates of the processing of words and letter strings have compared activations elicited by (unpronounceable, nonword) letter strings with activations elicited by face and texture stimuli. Regions responding more strongly to letter strings primarily involved the left occipitotemporal and inferior occipital sulci. The suggestion is that these regions comprise a prelexical, presemantic stage of word-form processing in the reading system Because learning to read is a very recent event in evolution, regions of the cortex specialized for words and letter strings are presumably not present at birth. Thus, if such regions exist, word-selective regions must develop through protracted experience with written words, demonstrating that the environment helps shape the architecture of the visual system. Stimuli within a category, such as letters, tend to occur together and would therefore be encoded in close temporal proximity. In this view, many years of repeated experience with letters could lead to regions in the ventral temporal cortex specialized to process letters, similar to the development of conjoint selectivity by monkey TE cells for visual images that are repeatedly shown together. Consistent with this proposal, brain damaged patients can be selectively impaired at letter recognition compared to, for example, number recognition and vice versa.Collectively, the evidence suggests that the visual system is organized such that some object categories are represented in a relatively specialized fashion: faces, places, body parts, and words appear to have dedicated neural mechanisms for their representation. Of these, the evidence is perhaps strongest for faces, at least in some individuals with relatively pure forms of prosopagnosia. Not surprisingly, alternative proposals have been advanced concerning the organization of ventral visual cortex. We briefl y discuss two of them now.It has been proposed that the FFA is specialized not for the processing of faces per se but rather for the processing of objects with which one has acquired expertise According to another alternative framework, the functional architecture of the ventral stream is viewed not as being composed of category-specifi c regions but instead as containing a distributed representation of information about object form Although the distinction between perception and memory might seem sharp, in reality these two processes are intimately connected. Indeed, each time one identifi es an object, one implicitly retrieves stored knowledge about that object. In other words, identifying an object necessarily implies knowing what that object is. Further, it is generally believed that the same neural tissue devoted to object processing also serves to store the long-term representations of objects. For example, when a subject mentally imagines faces or houses (requiring the retrieval of stored object representations from long-term memory), the same patterns of activation across ventral temporal cortex are seen as those observed when actually viewing faces or houses.Object knowledge implies not only familiarity with the shape of an object, but also other attributes, such as its typical color and function. For example, how does one know that bulldozers are usually yellow and are used for digging? One neuroimaging study that examined this question asked subjects to name either the associated color or the associated action in response to the presentation of black and white line drawings of objects These neuroimaging results provide a basis for understanding category-specifi c disorders of knowledge resulting from patterns of focal brain damage.This type of defi cit, seen most commonly for animals and tools, involves a selective diffi culty in naming and retrieving information about objects from a single category. If the distinction between different categories of objects, such as animals and tools, is dependent on access to information about different types of attributes, and if such attributes (e.g., form, color, motion and object-use associated motor movements) are stored in separate regions of the brain, then one may fi nd a category-specifi c defi cit depending on the site of the lesion. Indeed, consistent with neuroimaging data, it has been found that the locations of lesions in patients with impaired recognition and impaired naming of drawings of animals included the medial aspects of the occipital lobe, nearly the same region active during animal naming. In contrast, the locations of lesions in patients with impaired recognition and impaired naming of drawings of tools all included the middle temporal gyrus, nearly the same region active during tool naming Prosopagnosia, a selective defi cit in recognizing faces, is associated with damage to the occipitotemporal cortex, including the fusiform gyrus. Consistent with this impairment, neuroimaging and electrophysiological studies have demonstrated that the fusiform gyrus responds selectively to faces and that this activation is linked to face perception. Although these fi ndings suggest the existence of a specialized region for processing faces, an alternative interpretation is that the fusiform gyrus performs specialized computations associated with perceiving certain objects, including but not limited to faces. Such computations would presumably apply to many objects with which one has expertise. Moreover, the existence of a region in the left occipitotemporal cortex selectively activated by letter strings and words demonstrates the role of experience in shaping the functional architecture of the object recognition pathway.Early studies of brain damage in humans and lesions in monkeys pointed to the crucial role of tissue in the ventral parts of the temporal cortex for object perception and recognition. After many decades of intensive research, one can now say that the ventral portions of the temporal cortex form the last stations of an occipitotemporal ventral pathway, beginning in the primary visual cortex and progressing through multiple visual areas beyond it. In macaque monkeys, important regions for object perception and recognition include areas TEO and TE of the inferior temporal cortex. In humans, homologous circuits appear to exist in both occipital and temporal regions, including the lateral occipital complex, the fusiform gyrus, and nearby regions in the ventral temporal cortex.Single-unit recording studies in monkeys show a progressive increase in the complexity of object features needed to "trigger" cells at progressively more anterior stations in the occipitotemporal pathway. Many TE neurons show preservation of their selectivity over transformations that change the physical stimulus, such as retinal position, size, distance in depth, and degree of ambient illumination. At the highest levels of the pathway, within area TE, some neurons are preferentially responsive to faces and other biologically signifi cant stimuli.More recently, neuroimaging and evoked potential studies in humans with implanted electrodes have also shed light on the mechanisms by which the primate brain represents objects. Descriptions of prosopagnosia, a selective defi cit of face recognition that is associated with damage to ventral occipitotemporal cortex, foreshadowed discoveries of cortical zones that are activated preferentially by face stimuli. At the same time, selectivity for letter strings and even for learned arbitrary stimuli has suggested that experience also infl uences activity in the ventral pathway and, in the long term, may tune representations. Finally, more general knowledge about objects (what they are used for and how to manipulate them) appears to be stored across a distributed network of sensory and motor cortical areas.Afraz, S. R., Kiani, R., and As we move through the world, new visual, auditory, vestibular, and somatosensory inputs are continuously presented to the brain. Given such constantly changing input, it is remarkable how easily we are able to keep track of where things are. We can reach for an object, look at it, or even kick it without making a conscious effort to assess its location in space, but how do we construct a representation of space that allows us to act so effortlessly? This chapter outlines the contributions of several brain areas in the parietal, frontal, and hippocampal cortices to spatial representation, spatial memory, and the generation of actions in space.Within the cerebral hemispheres, visual information is processed serially by a succession of areas beginning with the primary visual cortex of the occipital lobe. Within this hierarchical system, there are two parallel chains, or streams, of areas: the ventral stream, leading downward into the temporal lobe, and the dorsal stream, leading forward into the parietal lobe (Ungerlieder and Mishkin, 1982) (Chapter 46). Although the two streams are interconnected to some degree, it is a fair fi rst approximation to describe them as separate parallel systems. Areas of the ventral stream play a critical role in the recognition of visual patterns, including faces, whereas areas within the dorsal stream contribute selectively to conscious spatial awareness and to the spatial guidance of actions, such as reaching and grasping. Dorsal stream areas have at least two distinctive functional characteristics: (1) they contain a comparatively extensive representation of the peripheral visual fi eld and (2) they appear to be specialized for the detection and analysis of moving visual images. Both traits would be expected in any system processing visual information for use in spatial awareness and in the visual guidance of behavior.Although visual input is important for spatial operations, awareness of space is more than just a visual function. It is possible to apprehend the shape of an object and know where it is, regardless of whether it is seen or sensed through touch. Accordingly, spatial awareness, considered as a general phenomenon, depends not simply on visual areas of the dorsal stream but rather on the higher order cortical areas to which they send their output. The transition from areas serving purely visual functions to those mediating generalized spatial awareness is gradual, but has been accomplished by the time the dorsal stream reaches its termination in the association cortex of the posterior parietal lobe.The posterior parietal cortex is considered to be preeminent among cortical areas responsible for spatial awareness because lesions of the posterior parietal cortex lead to the most devastating and specifi c impairments of spatial cognition. However, numerous other association areas in the cerebral hemisphere mediate cognitive functions that depend in some way on the use of spatial information. These areas occupy a continuous region of the cerebral hemisphere, encompassing large parts of the frontal, cingulate, temporal, parahippocampal, and insular cortices. They are connected to each other anatomically and to the parietal cortex by a parallel distributed pathway through which signals shuttle back and forth The parietal lobe is divided into superior and inferior parietal lobules. Within each lobule, several subdivisions are distinguished by anatomical and functional properties . In both humans and monkeys, the superior parietal lobule serves functions related primarily to somesthesis, or tactile perception, whereas the inferior parietal lobule serves functions related primarily to visuospatial cognition ( The neurologist Balint in 1909 fi rst described a group of behavioral impairments specifi cally associated with damage to the parietal lobes. Balint's syndrome includes diffi culty in executing eye movements to engage visual targets (ocular apraxia), an inability to perceive multiple objects at the same time (simultanagnosia), and inaccuracy in reaching for visual targets (optic ataxia). This collection of symptoms refl ects an impairment in the visual guidance of movement and, more generally, in spatial cognition. Another major class of spatial defi cits is known as neglect, the failure to attend to portions of space. Many other deficits in spatial behavior and cognition have been observed in patients with parietal damage, such as the inability to judge distances between objects. The following sections describe three specifi c impairments of spatial behavior known to arise from injury to the parietal lobe.After injury to the posterior parietal cortex, some patients experience diffi culty in the visual perception of spatial relations. They can see objects, but cannot judge whether two objects are the same size or which of two objects is closer. When asked to copy simple line drawings, they may omit or transpose parts, as if unable to judge accurately the spatial arrangement of the object's components. In some patients, failure on visuospatial tests arises from a specifi c inability to see more than one object at a time A particularly illuminating test carried out on simultanagnosic patients is shown in After damage to the parietal cortex, some patients experience diffi culty in making visually guided arm movements. This condition is referred to as misreaching, or optic ataxia Disorders of spatial awareness arising from parietal lobe injury are not merely a laboratory phenomenon, but can have a profound impact on the patient's daily life, as described in the following case study of simultanagnosia (from When fi rst examined by the authors four months after a right hemisphere infarction, the patient's major complaint was that her environment appeared fragmented; although she saw individual items clearly, they appeared to be isolated and she could not discern any meaningful relationship among them. She stated, for example, that she could fi nd her way in her home (in which she had lived for 25 years) with her eyes closed, but she became confused with her eyes open. On one occasion, for example, she attempted to fi nd her way to her bedroom by using a large lamp as a landmark; while walking toward the lamp, she fell over her dining room table. Although she enjoyed listening to the radio, television programs bewildered her because she could only "see" one person or object at a time and therefore could not determine who was speaking or being spoken to; she reported watching a movie in which, after hearing a heated argument, she noted to her surprise and consternation that the character she had been watching was suddenly sent reeling across the room, apparently as a consequence of a punch thrown by a character she had never seen. Although she was able to read single words effortlessly, she stopped reading because the "competing words" confused her. She was unable to write, as she claimed to be able to see only a single letter; thus when creating a letter, she saw only the tip of the pencil and the letter under construction and "lost" the previously constructed letters. In the test illustrated in Hemispatial neglect is a classic symptom of injury to the posterior parietal cortex. It is a condition in which a lateralized failure of spatial awareness is present. The most common form of neglect arises from damage to the right parietal lobe and is manifested as a failure to detect objects in the left half of space. Patients with neglect experience problems in daily life, such as colliding with obstacles on the contralesional side of the body or mistakenly identifying letters on the contralesional side of a written word. When asked to copy pictures or to draw simple objects from memory, they leave out details on the affected side. When asked to say whether two objects are the same or different, they tend to indicate that two dissimilar objects are the same if the differentiating details are on the contralesional side. Whether the problem underlying neglect is a failure of attention to one half of space or a failure of the ability to form a mental representation of that half of space is not clear.Neglect involves more than just a defect of attention to contralesional sensory events. For example, patients fail to report detail on the left half of an object even when they are asked to form a mental representation of the object by viewing it one part at a time as it passes slowly behind a vertical slit. In a famous set of experiments, patients were asked to imagine themselves in a familiar public setting and then to report what they would be able to see around them Given that neglect affects the half of space opposite an injured parietal lobe, each parietal lobe must represent the opposite half of space. On the face of it, this proposition does not sound particularly surprising. Most visual areas in each hemisphere represent the opposite half of the visual fi eld, most somatosensory areas represent the opposite half of the skin surface, and most motor areas represent muscles on the opposite half of the body. Injury to these areas leads to a sensory loss or motor impairment that affects the opposite half of a functional space defi ned with respect to some anatomical reference frame (the retina, the skin surface, or the muscles). In contrast, injury to the posterior parietal cortex gives rise to a neglect that may be defi ned with respect to any of several spatial reference frames. These fall into two broad classes: egocentric reference frames, in which objects and locations are represented relative to the observer; and allocentric reference frames, in which locations are represented in coordinates extrinsic to the observer. Examples of egocentric reference frames include those centered on the hand or the body. Allocentric reference frames include those in environmental coordinates (for example, room centered) and those centered on an object of interest. The full range of reference frames used by the brain is just beginning to be explored. Patients with neglect often show defi cits with respect to more than one reference frame. The following sections describe evidence for impairments of multiple spatial reference frames in neglect.A patient with left hemispatial neglect, looking straight ahead at the center of some object, will tend not to see detail on its left side. This observation is open to several interpretations. The simplest interpretation is that stimuli presented in the left visual fi eld tend not to be registered. However, the fundamental problem might actually be with registering stimuli that are to the left of the head, or to the left of the torso, or the object itself. These possibilities cannot be distinguished without disentangling the various reference frames. Experiments aimed at identifying the spatial reference frame in neglect indicate that a patient's failure to detect a stimulus is affected not only by its location relative to the retina but also by its location relative to the object or array within which it is contained, by its location relative to the body, and even by its location relative to a gravitationally defi ned reference frame. Patients span a continuum from exhibiting predominantly egocentric forms of neglect to predominantly allocentric neglect.In many patients, a component of neglect is object centered. If these patients are presented with an image anywhere in the visual fi eld, they tend to ignore its left side. In one experiment, patients with left hemispatial neglect were required to maintain fi xation on a small spot while chimeric faces (images formed by joining at the midline half-images representing the faces of two people) were presented at various visual fi eld locations. Their reports of what they saw were based predominantly on the right halves of the chimeric images. This was true even when the entire composite face was presented within the right visual hemifi eld. In a second experiment, patients with left hemifi eld neglect were required to maintain fi xation on a small spot while four stimuli in a horizontal row were presented. One of the stimuli was a letter that was to be named aloud. When the letter was in the leftmost location, patients were slower to name it, even when the entire array was in the right visual fi eld.A particularly dramatic way of demonstrating the object-centered nature of neglect is to ask patients to make copies of simple line drawings Patients with parietal lobe damage can exhibit deficits with respect to other allocentric reference frames in addition to the object-centered neglect described earlier. The role of a gravitational reference frame in neglect has emerged from studies in which patients face a display screen either while sitting upright or while lying on their side Further evidence that the parietal cortex represents the locations of objects relative to an external framework comes from the observation that neglect, in some patients, is restricted to stimuli within a certain range of distances from the body. The form of neglect termed peripersonal or proximal is specifi c for stimuli in the immediate vicinity of the body. Another form of neglect, termed extrapersonal, is specifi c for more distant stimuli. The implication of these fi ndings is that there is a localization of function within the parietal cortex and that neurons in discrete areas process sensory input from objects at different distances. Discrete areas of the parietal cortex are known to be specialized for relaying sensory information to different motor systems. Sensory input from peripersonal space is uniquely signifi cant for guiding reaching movements. In contrast, sensory input from greater distances (extrapersonal space) is linked primarily to the control of eye movements.The original distinction between dorsal and ventral processing streams in the primate visual system was based in part on differences in the effects of lesions of the posterior parietal cortex and the inferior temporal cortex . Monkeys with posterior parietal lesions are selectively impaired in visuospatial performance, such as judging which of two identical objects is located closer to a visual landmark. In contrast, inferior temporal cortex lesions produce defi cits in visual discrimination (for example, shape or pattern recognition; see Chapter 46).In addition to spatial perceptual defi cits, parietal lesions also produce spatial motor defi cits. After parietal lesions, monkeys have diffi culty directing eye movements toward targets in the hemispace opposite the side of the lesion To understand more precisely how the parietal cortex contributes to spatial cognition, several groups of investigators have measured the electrical activity of single neurons during the performance of spatial tasks. These studies were done in alert monkeys trained to make eye movements to visual targets. Because brain tissue itself has no sensory receptors, microelectrodes can be introduced into the brain without disturbing the performance of an animal on a task. By recording single neuron activity during specially designed tasks, neural activity can be related directly to the sensory, cognitive, and motor processes that underlie spatial behavior. The next four sections describe how neurons in specifi c areas within the parietal cortex are selectively activated during spatial tasks and how they contribute to spatial representation and cognition.The ventral intraparietal area (area VIP) is a functionally and anatomically defi ned area that lies at the junction of the visual and somatosensory districts within parietal cortex. Individual neurons respond strongly to moving stimuli and are selective for both the speed and the direction of the stimulus Three kinds of correspondence are found in VIP neurons. First, for each neuron, receptive fi elds in each modality match in location. For example, a neuron that responds to a visual stimulus in the upper left visual fi eld also responds when the left brow is touched. Second, receptive fi elds match in size. A neuron with a restricted visual receptive fi eld also has a small somatosensory receptive fi eld. The smallest visual receptive fi elds are those located at the fovea. It is striking that the corresponding somatosensory receptive fi elds for these neurons are not centered around the eye but are found around the mouth. In terms of sensitivity, the mouth can be thought of as the fovea of the facial somatosensory system. Hence it is logical that the two regions of highest spatial acuity should be linked. The third type of correspondence is in the preferred directions of movement. For example, a neuron responsive to a visual stimulus moving toward the right also responds when a small probe is brushed lightly across the face of the monkey moving to the right. In sum, visual and somatosensory receptive fi elds for individual VIP neurons match in location, size, and directional preference.The correspondence in receptive fi eld locations across modalities immediately raises a question: What happens to the relative locations of the visual and somatosensory receptive fi elds when the eyes move? If the visual receptive fi eld were simply retinotopic, it would move when the eyes do; if the somatosensory receptive fi eld were purely somatotopic, it would be unchanged by eye movements. There could not be a consistent correspondence in location if visual receptive fi elds were defi ned only with respect to the retina while somatosensory receptive fi elds were defi ned only with respect to the skin surface.The answer is that visual receptive fi elds are linked to the skin surface and not to the retina. A neuron that responds best to a visual stimulus approaching the forehead and has a matching somatosensory receptive fi eld on the brow will continue to respond best to a visual stimulus moving toward the brow regardless of where the monkey is looking. Thus, both visual and somatosensory receptive fi elds are defi ned with respect to the skin surface. In this sense, the receptive fi elds are head centered: a given VIP neuron responds to stimulation of a certain portion of the skin surface and to the visual stimulus aligned with it no matter which part of the retina is activated.In sum, neurons in area VIP encode bimodal sensory information in a head-centered representation of space. This kind of representation would be most useful for guiding head movements. Anatomical studies indicate that area VIP sends information to premotor cortex including the specifi c region that is involved in generating head movements.The lateral intraparietal area (area LIP) is a functionally defi ned area within the visual district of parietal cortex. Neurons in LIP exhibit several different kinds of activity during spatial tasks A third important feature of LIP neuron activity is the sustained responses observed when the monkey must remember the location at which the stimulus appeared. In this task, a stimulus is fl ashed only briefl y but the neuron continues to fi re for several seconds after the stimulus is gone, as though it were holding a memory trace of the target location. A particularly intriguing question in understanding spatial representation concerns the fate of this memory-related activity in area LIP following an eye movement, as will be described later. A fourth kind of activation commonly observed in LIP neurons is related to performance of a saccade-a rapid eye movement-toward the receptive fi eld. Some LIP neurons fi re just before the monkey initiates a saccade that will move the fovea onto a target presented in the receptive fi eld. LIP neurons have overlapping sensory and motor fi elds, just like neurons in the superior colliculus (Chapter 33). Finally, LIP neuron activity can be modulated by the position of the eye in the orbit In sum, individual LIP neurons have receptive fi elds at particular retinal locations and carry visual, memory, and saccade-related signals that can be modulated by attention and by eye position. Activity in area LIP cannot be characterized as a simple visual or motor signal. Rather, the level of activation in a given LIP neuron refl ects the degree to which attention has been allocated to a location within the receptive fi eld.Every time we move our eyes, each object in our surroundings activates a new set of retinal neurons. Despite this ever-changing input, we experience a stable visual world. How is this possible? More than a century ago, Helmholtz proposed that the reason the world appears to stay still when we move our eyes is that the "effort of will" involved in making a saccade simultaneously adjusts our perception to take that specifi c eye movement into account. He suggested that when a motor command to move the eyes is issued, a copy of that command, or corollary discharge, is sent to brain areas responsible for generating our internal image of the world. This image is then updated so as to be aligned with the new visual information that will arrive in the cortex after the eye movement. A simple experiment shows that Helmholtz's account must be essentially true. When the retina is displaced by pressing on the eye, the world does seem to move, presumably because there is no corollary discharge. Without that internal knowledge of the intended eye movement, there is no way to update the spatial representation of the world around us.Neurons in area LIP contribute to this updating of the internal image In the second set of trials ( The novel fi nding is shown in The signifi cance of this fi nding lies in what it illustrates about spatial representation in area LIP. It indicates that the internal image is dynamic rather than static. Tonic, memory-related activity in area LIP not only allows neurons to encode a salient spatial location after the stimulus is gone, but also allows for dynamic remapping of visual information in conjunction with eye movements. This updating of the internal visual image has specifi c consequences for spatial representation in the parietal cortex. Instead of spatial information being encoded in purely retinotopic coordinates, tied to the specifi c neurons initially activated by the stimulus, the information is encoded in eye-centered coordinates. This is a subtle distinction but a very important one in generating accurate spatial behavior. Maintaining visual information in eye-centered coordinates tells the monkey not just where the stimulus was on the retina when it fi rst appeared, but where it would be on the retina following an intervening eye movement. The result is that the monkey always has accurate information with which to program an eye movement toward a real or a remembered target. Further results from this series of experiments indicate that humans also depend on this kind of remapping for accurate spatial representation.In sum, neurons in area LIP encode sensory information in an eye-centered representation of space, the format most useful for guiding eye movements. Area LIP sends projections to both the superior colliculus and the frontal eye fi elds, regions that are involved in generating eye movements. In addition to area LIP, the parietal cortex contains a number of functionally distinct areas, each of which may be specialized for particular types of stimuli and particular regions of space. The general point is that the problem of spatial representation may be solved in several ways, and each solution may contribute to the generation of a different kind of action.Spatially selective neuronal activity in area LIP is graded in strength. If the monkey's attention to a given location or intention to make a saccade in a given direction increases in strength, then the fi ring of LIP neurons with response fi elds in that direction also increases. This has been demonstrated in decision tasks-tasks requiring the monkey to decide which of several possible saccades to make. A decision can be either sensory-based or value-based. In a sensory decision task, the monkey must judge whether a visual display contains dots moving to the right or left and must report the judgment by executing a rightward or leftward saccade During the preparatory period of the trial, LIP neurons fi re strongly if the target in their response fi eld is associated with a valuable reward. In this task the activity of spatially selective LIP neurons refl ects the value of the target. These two fi ndings do not necessarily indicate that LIP plays a direct role in making sensory-or value-based decisions. They can also be explained on the assumption that LIP neurons mediate attention or motor preparation and that they fi re more strongly when attention or motor preparation is more intense The posterior parietal cortex plays a critical role in spatial awareness. Injury to the parietal cortex in humans and monkeys leads to defi cits in spatial perception and action. Physiological studies in monkeys have shown that parietal neurons construct a representation of space by combining signals from multiple sensory modalities with motor signals. An important physiological fi nding is that parietal neurons represent spatial locations relative to multiple reference frames, including ones centered on the eye and the head. In accord with these physiological fi ndings, human neuropsychological studies have shown that neglect resulting from parietal lobe injury can be expressed with respect to several different reference frames.The frontal lobe is involved in spatial functions as a natural result of its being involved in behavioral control. The three main divisions of the frontal lobe are the primary motor cortex located on the precentral gyrus; the premotor cortex, including the supplementary eye fi eld, located in front of the primary motor cortex; and the prefrontal cortex ( The primary motor cortex contains a map of the muscles of the body in which the leg is represented medially, the head laterally, and other body parts at intermediate locations. Within this map are patches of neurons that represent different muscles. Neurons within a given patch receive proprioceptive input from a muscle or small group of synergistic muscles and send their output back to that muscle or group of synergists by way of a multisynaptic pathway through the brain stem and spinal cord. There have been many studies in which the electrical activity of neurons in the primary motor cortex is monitored while animals move (Chapter 30). The general conclusion of these studies is that neurons in the primary motor cortex are active when the corresponding muscles are undergoing active contraction. It is important to note, however, that neurons in the primary motor cortex probably do more than simply encode the levels of activation of individual muscles. One proposal is that they encode movement trajectories. Every voluntary movement can be described in two quite different but perfectly complementary ways: in terms of the lengths of the muscles or in terms of the position of the part of the body being moved. For example, during an arm movement, changes take place both in the lengths of muscles acting on the arm and in the position of the hand. Could it be that neurons in the primary motor cortex encode a spatial variable, such as the direction of movement of the hand, rather than a muscle variable?Evidence for the idea that neurons of the primary motor cortex encode movement direction has come from studies in which monkeys make reaching movements in various directions. Individual neurons are selective for a specifi c direction of movement: a given neuron may fi re most strongly during movements up and to the right and progressively less strongly for movements that deviate from the preferred direction One of the functions of premotor cortical areas is to act as a conduit through which sensory signals are relayed to the motor system. The sensory information that reaches these areas has been highly processed already in the posterior cerebral hemispheres. Thus it is not surprising that the sensory receptive fi elds of some neurons in the premotor cortex are defi ned with respect to an external spatial framework in a form suitable for use by the motor system.Both head and hand-centered visual receptive fi elds have been described in the premotor cortex. First, in portions of the premotor cortex representing orofacial movements, neurons respond to visual stimuli at a certain location relative to the head To determine whether the receptive fi eld was head or retina-centered required a second phase of testing FIGURE 47.7 Data from a neuron in the premotor cortex with a head-centered visual receptive fi eld. (A) While the monkey was looking straight ahead at a fi xation point (F), an object approached and receded, traveling either along trajectory 1 (T1, to the right of the head) or along trajectory 2 (T2, to the left of the head). The neuron fi red strongly only when the object approached along trajectory 1. (B) When the monkey looked at a new fi xation point on the far left, the neuron still responded only when the object approached along trajectory 1, indicating that the receptive fi eld is tied to the location of the head and not to the location of the retina. The time lines above each raster and histogram show the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) eye position during one trial. The time line below shows the position of the visual object as it comes toward and then moves away from the monkey. From A second type of body-centered spatial representation in the premotor cortex has been observed in areas representing arm movements. Here, neurons respond to visual stimuli if they are presented in the vicinity of the hand A particularly interesting form of allocentric spatial representation is found in the supplementary eye fi eld (SEF). The SEF is a division of the premotor cortex with attentional and oculomotor functions. Neurons here fi re before and during the execution of saccadic eye movements. Two characteristics of the SEF set it apart from subcortical oculomotor centers and suggest that its contribution to eye movement control occurs at a comparatively abstract level. First, neurons here fi re while the monkey is waiting to make an eye movement in the preferred direction, as well as during the eye movement itself. Second, some SEF neurons become especially active when the monkey is learning to associate arbitrary visual cues with particular directions of eye movements. SEF neurons exhibit a unique form of spatial selectivity in monkeys trained to make eye movements to particular locations on an object. In this context, SEF neurons encode the direction of the impending eye movement as defi ned relative to an object-centered reference frame This situation made it possible to ask whether the activity of the neuron was related to the objectcentered direction of the movement or to its physical direction. To the right of each panel in Object-centered direction selectivity serves an important function in natural settings. In scanning the environment, we sometimes look toward locations where things are expected to appear, but which, at the time, contain no detail, for example, the center of a blank screen or the center of an empty doorway. Our eyes are guided to these featureless locations by surrounding features that defi ne them indirectly. It is spe-cifi cally in these cases that the SEF may contribute to the selection of the target for an eye movement.Working memory is required to hold a plan in mind and carry it out step by step (Chapter 52). The fact that this ability is severely impaired in some patients following prefrontal injury indicates that this region plays a crucial role in working memory. Insofar as plans and working memory have a spatial component, operations carried out by the prefrontal cortex are also spatial in nature. Single neuron-recording experiments in monkeys performing delayed-response tasks have demonstrated the importance of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex for both spatial and nonspatial forms of working memory The idea that the prefrontal cortex mediates spatial working memory has received further support from lesion experiments in monkeys. After injury to or inactivation of specifi c locations in the prefrontal cortex, . From Neural signals related to working memory are found in object memory tasks as well as spatial tasks (Chapter 52). In a task in which the monkey had to remember the identity of an object as well as its location, some neurons were selectively activated by remembering the object In many areas of the frontal lobe, neurons fi re more strongly when a monkey anticipates receiving a larger reward for making a saccade This issue has been resolved by manipulating independently the size of the reward promised in the event of the monkey's successfully completing the trial (one or three drops of juice) and the size of the penalty threatened in the event of failure (a one-second or eight-second time-out). A large promised reward and a large threatened penalty have opposite value but both act to increase motivation. Spatially selective neurons in premotor cortex fi re more strongly when either a large reward has been promised or a large penalty has been threatened Neurons in the frontal cortex represent spatial information as a natural consequence of their role in controlling behavior. Neurons in the primary motor cortex encode the directions of movements. Neurons in the premotor cortex encode locations relative to the body, even when these locations are not the immediate targets of actions. SEF neurons encode locations in an allocentric, object-centered representation. Neurons in the prefrontal cortex encode the locations of and identity of objects being held in short-term memory. Finally, the strength of neural activity in premotor cortex is modulated by the monkey's level of motivation while neurons in orbitofrontal cortex encode the anticipated value of the expected reward.Spatial functions of the hippocampus center on its role in memory formation (Chapter 50). The hippocampus is an area of primitive cortex, or allocortex, hidden on the underside of the temporal lobe. It is connected to a set of immediately adjacent cortical areas, including the perirhinal, entorhinal, and parahippocampal cortices Extensive evidence implicates the hippocampus and related medial temporal structures in the formation of declarative memories in humans. Memories dependent on the hippocampus include, although they are by no means restricted to, memories for spatial material. In addition to many other impairments, the amnesia of the noted patient H.M. was evident in his inability to learn to fi nd his way through new neighborhoods. Patients with damage to the hippocampus, especially the right hippocampus, are impaired on tests requiring them to inspect a scene with many objects and then to recall the locations of individual objects.The hippocampus has a role in both spatial and nonspatial memory. In rats, as described in Chapter 50, the hippocampus is essential not only for remembering locations but also for remembering odors and for learning associations between stimuli and rewards . Likewise, in humans, memories of many kinds depend on the hippocampus. Patient EP, profoundly amnesic after extensive medial temporal damage resulting from a viral encephalitis, suffers from problems with spatial memory. He cannot learn the layout of the new neighborhood where he now lives . However, he is not impaired at spatial navigation in itself. He is able to fi nd his way around the neighborhood where he grew up and can describe it in detail. Moreover, his defi cit extends beyond spatial memory. Like patient HM, he fails to recognize someone to whom he was introduced only minutes before. How the hippocampus uses spatial information, along with nonspatial information, to form new memories is taken up in Chapter 50.Recordings from hippocampal neurons in rats running mazes or exploring open areas have revealed a remarkable degree of spatial selectivity. Many neurons in the hippocampus have place fi elds: a given neuron will fi re most strongly when the rat is within  47.10 Evidence that orbitofrontal neurons encode expected value whereas premotor neurons are subject to motivational modulation. A cue presented early in each trial instructed the monkey whether to make a rightward or leftward saccade at the trial's end. It also indicated whether making the instructed saccade would lead to a large or small reward (three drops or one drop of juice). Finally, it indicated whether failure to make the saccade would lead to a large or small penalty (a one-second or eight-second time-out). After a delay of several seconds, the monkey was permitted to respond. For a saccade in the instructed direction, the monkey received the promised reward. For any other response, the monkey incurred the threatened penalty. The orbitofrontal neuron encoded the value of the outcomes predicted by the cue. It responded most strongly when the combined predicted outcome was best (A: large reward promised and small penalty threatened), at an intermediate level when it was middling (B: small reward promised and small penalty threatened) and least strongly when it was worst (C: small reward promised and large penalty threatened). The premotor neuron fi red during the delay period at a rate that refl ected how motivated the monkey was. It fi red most strongly when the monkey had something signifi cant to work for, either earning a large reward (D) or avoiding a large penalty (F) and least strongly when little was at stake (E). In each panel, time is on the horizontal axis. The histogram represents the average fi ring rate of the neuron as a function of time during the trial. In the underlying raster display, each horizontal line corresponds to a single trial and each dot represents an action potential. From Neurons in other regions of the hippocampal system are sensitive to the direction in which the head is pointing. Sensitivity to heading is common in the postsubiculum, a cortical area adjacent to and closely linked to the hippocampus. Each postsubicular neuron fi res most strongly when the head of the rat is pointing in its preferred direction and fi res progressively less strongly as the orientation of the head of the rat deviates farther from that direction. In a room that is suddenly darkened, postsubicular neurons remain sensitive to the heading of the rat so long as the rat retains a sense of spatial orientation, as refl ected by error-free performance on spatial tests. When the sense of spatial orientation drifts away from veridicality during prolonged darkness, as evidenced by the occurrence of systematic errors on spatial tests, then the preferred headings of postsubicular neurons exhibit a commensurate drift. These observations establish that neurons of the hippocampal system are sensitive to the spatial orientation of the rat. The place cells in the hippocampus and the head-direction cells encode complementary forms of spatial information.As an animal moves through space it can keep track of the route it has taken by combining information from place cells and head-direction cells. This path integration produces a sense of position that is independent of the immediate visual environment. The path integration system is thought to depend on grid cells in the medial entorhinal cortex, an area of highorder neocortex adjacent to the hippocampus The map in medial entorhinal cortex, like that in other regions, is anchored to external landmarks but, unlike the map in other areas, it persists in the absence of landmarks. The grid cells constitute a map of relative spatial location that is independent of external sensory cues and the specifi c environment.The hippocampal system mediates the formation of memories, including memories with spatial content. Injury to the hippocampal system, both in humans and in other animals, leads to profound defi cits of memory, especially navigational memory. In accord with these fi ndings, single neuron recording in rats has revealed that neurons of the hippocampal system have place fi elds, encoding the location of the rat in its environment, and directional sensitivity, encoding head direction relative to the environment. Information from these neurons is combined so that animals can keep track of their position in space over time.The preceding sections described how spatial information is processed in cortical areas that serve distinct functions, such as motor control, attention, and working memory. Even within the motor system, there appears to be a fractionation of spatial functions in that neurons controlling movements of the eyes, head, and arm represent the locations of visible targets relative to eye, head, and hand-centered reference frames, respectively. In addition to these distinctions, there may be another fundamental distinction within brain systems mediating spatial functions. Areas mediating conscious awareness of spatial information may be partially separate from those mediating the spatial guidance of motor behavior. These functions may seem inseparable insofar as one must be aware of the location of a thing in order to look at it or reach for it. However, this is not necessarily the case. An indication that spatial awareness and spatially programmed behavior are distinguishable has come from studies of patients with "blindsight" Similar fi ndings have been reported in patients with diffuse pathology affecting widespread areas, including the prestriate visual cortex. One such patient, DF, has been extensively studied in spatial tasks Spatial cognition is a function of many brain areas. No one area is uniquely responsible for the ability to carry out spatial tasks. Nevertheless, some generalizations can be made about the part of the problem that is solved in each brain region. The parietal lobe plays a crucial role in many aspects of spatial awareness, including spatially focused attention. The representation of space in the parietal cortex takes several forms. Each subdivision within the parietal cortex contributes to different kinds of spatial representations, designed to help guide different kinds of actions.In contrast to the parietal cortex, the frontal lobe transforms spatial awareness into actions. The motor cortex uses a spatial framework to encode intended actions. The premotor cortex contains a set of separate spatial representations to generate eye, hand, and arm movements. The SEF contains neurons with very highorder, abstract spatial representations. Prefrontal cortex mediates spatial working memory. Finally, the hippocampus mediates spatial declarative memories, including those that underlie spatial navigation.Beneath the unity of our spatial perception lies a diversity of specifi c representations. The distributed nature of spatial cognition and the many purposes it serves means that we construct internal representations of space not once but many times in parallel. A challenge for the future is to understand how these many representations function together so seamlessly.Intuition, together with cognitive and psychophysical experiments, shows that the brain is limited in the amount of information that it can process at any moment in time. For instance, when people are asked to identify the objects of a briefl y presented scene, they become less accurate as the number of objects increases. Similarly, when people concentrate on one demanding task (e.g., mental arithmetic) this typically comes at the expense of performance on other simultaneous activities (e.g., recalling a familiar tune). Limitations on the ability to simultaneously carry out multiple cognitive or perceptual tasks refl ect the limited capacity of some stage or stages of sensory processing, decision-making, or behavioral control. As a result of such computational bottlenecks, it is necessary to have neural mechanisms in place to ensure the selection of stimuli, or tasks, that are immediately relevant to behavior. "Attention" is a broad term denoting the mechanisms that mediate this selection.Over the past several decades, research has concentrated on the relation between attention and sensory perception. Clearly, it is possible to focus on selected stimuli in any sensory modality-sights, sounds, smells, and touch. Most studies, however, have examined vision, the dominant sensory modality for humans and nonhuman primates. These experiments have investigated visual attention at multiple levels, ranging from behavior to the single neuron. This chapter outlines the view of attention that has emerged from these studies.A key observation is that attending to an object greatly enhances the ability to perceive and report the object's visual attributes; conversely, withdrawing attention, either by force of the behavioral context or following certain brain lesions, can render observers practically blind to certain visual events. A second key point is that the attentional processes that underlie perceptual selection may also guide the voluntary eye movements with which foveate animals, such as monkeys and humans, scan the environment. In terms of neural organization, although some neural centers have been closely linked with the control of attention, attention appears to affect the activity of neurons at almost all levels of the visual system.In natural behavior, individuals have great fl exibility as to how and when they attend and what they attend to. Attending to an object often is accompanied by overt orienting toward that object using the eyes and possibly also the head and body. When a person enters a room, it is natural to turn in that person's direction. However, one can also attend covertly to objects that are not in the center of gaze, without looking directly at them. When driving, one can monitor a passing car while continuing to look straight ahead. Covert attention can improve peripheral visual acuity, thereby extending the functional fi eld of view. Although one can direct attention without moving the eyes, the converse does not appear to be true: experiments show that covert attention must be deployed to an object before that object can be targeted with an eye movement. Indeed, saccades-rapid eye movements used most commonly for scanning the environmentFundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition may be considered a motor manifestation of visual attention, a relationship that is discussed in more detail later.Certain external stimuli can summon attention in and of themselves. These can be physically salient objects, such as especially large, bright, or loud objects, or stimuli with special learned signifi cance, such as one's own name or a mother's face. This mode of attentional engagement, known as exogenous or stimulus driven, ensures that salient and potentially important external events do not pass unnoticed even if they are not being actively sought out. However, purposeful behavior often requires that attention be directed voluntarily, or endogenously, based on internally defi ned goals and against potential external distractions. When reading, one purposefully directs one's attention from one word to the next, tuning out noise and other distractions. In natural behavior, endogenous and exogenous factors interact continuously to control the allocation of sensory processing Another important issue is what is attended. Attention can be directed to a location in space, regardless of what happens to be at that location. It can also be directed to a feature, as when one searches within a complex scene for an object of a particular shape or color. Finally, attention can select whole objects, as demonstrated by studies showing that when attention is directed to one feature of an object, the other features of the same object are selected automatically for visual processing, and by studies fi nding that when attention is directed to one of two semitransparent objects, attending to a feature of one object impairs processing of the features of the other object. In each of these cases, attention has been found to facilitate processing of the attended location, feature, or object, as assessed at the behavioral and neural levels Attention is thus highly fl exible and can be deployed in a manner that best serves the organism's momentary behavioral goals: to locations, features, or objects, based on internal goals or the external environment, with or without accompanying orienting movements. It is important to keep in mind that although these phenomena can be isolated in laboratory experiments, all varieties of attention operate seamlessly during natural behavior.Studies of patients with brain lesions have identifi ed regions of the brain that are involved in attention (see The behavioral impairments in neglect cannot be explained by simple sensory or motor defi cits A related but milder attentional defi cit, known as extinction, can follow more limited brain lesions or can occur during recovery from the acute phase of neglect. In visual extinction, patients are able to orient toward a contralesional stimulus presented in isolation, but fail to notice it if the same stimulus is presented simultaneously with an ipsilateral distracter. Extinction-like defi cits are demonstrated readily with the spatial cuing task In each case, the copies exclude important elements that appeared on the left side of the model, indicating that the patient was unable to process information about the left side of the model.NEGLECT SYNDROME: A DEFICIT OF SPATIAL ATTENTION when patients are cued to the contralesional fi eld but asked to detect an ipsilesional target. Extinction-like phenomena also have been demonstrated in search tasks in which patients are asked to fi nd a target object located at various locations in a complex scene. The time needed to fi nd a target in contralesional space increases in proportion with the number and salience of ipsilesional distracters.Studies in monkeys have supported the conclusion that frontal and parietal cortices play a role in controlling the allocation of attention. These studies point to two interconnected areas, one in the parietal cortex, the lateral intraparietal area (LIP), and one in the frontal lobe, the frontal eye fi eld (FEF), as being important for spatial attention. Many neurons in FEF and LIP have visual receptive fi elds, meaning that they respond to visual stimuli that activate a limited region of the retina. These receptive fi elds are mostly contralateral, so that the FEF and LIP in one side of the brain represent the locations of objects in the contralateral portion of the visual fi eld. Receptive fi elds are retinotopic, that is they are linked to the retina and move relative to the external world every time the eye moves. Thus, during natural behavior LIP and FEF neurons are stimulated by numerous objects that enter or exit their receptive fi eld by virtue of the observers' own movement.Despite this continuous visual stimulation, LIP neurons respond little to most objects during natural viewing. For instance, the LIP neuron in In the example shown in A number of studies have shown that directly manipulating activity in the LIP and FEF can affect the distribution of attention. Reversible inactivation of the LIP or FEF using microinjections of the GABA agonist, muscimol, produces defi cits in target selection during either saccade-based or covert visual search tasks. In addition, subthreshold microstimulation of FEF can bias the covert distribution of attention. These fi ndings support the conclusion that LIP and FEF are parts of the network of areas that mediate the allocation of attention. FIGURE 48.3 LIP neurons encode a spatial salience representation. (A) LIP neurons are sensitive to the physical conspicuity of objects in the receptive fi eld. An LIP neuron responds strongly when a visual stimulus is fl ashed in its receptive fi eld (left). The same neuron does not respond if the physically identical stimulus is stable in the world and enters the receptive fi eld by virtue of the monkeys' eye movement (center). The neuron again responds if the stimulus entering the receptive fi eld is rendered salient by fl ashing it on and off on each trial (before it enters the receptive fi eld). In each panel, rasters show the times of individual action potentials relative to stimulus onset (left) or the eye movement that brings the stimulus in the receptive fi eld (center and right). Traces underneath the rasters show average fi ring rate. Bottom traces show the horizontal and vertical eye position. The rapid eye movement (saccade) that brings the stimulus in the receptive fi eld is seen as the abrupt defl ection in eye position traces. (B) LIP neurons are sensitive to the behavioral relevance of objects in the receptive fi eld. Traces show average fi ring rate of an LIP neuron when the monkey is cued to make a saccade to a stimulus in the receptive fi eld. In the left panels the monkey is fi xating and a stable stimulus is in the receptive fi eld. The neuron has low fi ring rate. In the center panel the monkey receives a cue instructing him to make a saccade to the receptive fi eld. The neuron gradually increases its response. In the right panel the monkey executes the instructed saccade. The neural response remains high until after the eye movement. Converging evidence shows that spatially-selective responses in LIP and FEF are modulated by reward expectation, the memory-or expectation-of specifi c events, by contextual variables (i.e., relationship between task events), and the similarity between target and distracters. In the experiment illustrated in the higher probability of reward. LIP responses to the saccade target (blue traces) increased as a function of reward probability. Note that reward probability modulated the LIP response but did not fundamentally change the neurons' spatial selectivity: neurons always responded more before a saccade to the receptive fi eld than before a saccade away even if the reward expected for the former was less than for the latter. Behavior related modulations of LIP also include effects related to limb rather than eye movements. In one experiment monkeys were trained to discriminate the orientation of a cue presented in the peripheral visual fi eld and, without making a saccade to the cue, to report the orientation of the cue by releasing a bar grasped with either the right or left hands. LIP neurons generated the expected spatial salience signal, responding much more strongly if the cue than if a distracter appeared in their receptive fi elds These fi ndings suggest that salience maps integrate information about a wide variety of behavioral cues relevant for directing attention, whether these cues are from the visual, cognitive, motor or motivational domains have the potential to coordinate perceptual selection with ongoing action for a wide variety of behaviors.Human functional brain imaging studies are in agreement with both single-cell physiology and neuropsychological studies in identifying areas in the parietal, frontal, and cingulate cortices as being especially active in relation to spatially directed attention. When observers attend to a location in space in anticipation of the appearance of a stimulus, this is accompanied by elevated levels of activity in a fronto-parietal network consisting of the superior parietal lobule (SPL), the frontal eye fi eld (FEF), and the supplementary eye fi eld (SEF) extending into the anterior cingulate cortex ( indicating a general domain-independent mechanism of attentional control Frontal and parietal areas have been associated with the control of spatial attention, but they are not usually considered crucial for visual processing or object recognition. There is converging evidence from event-related potential (ERP) and functional imaging studies that feedback signals from the fronto-parietal areas that control the allocation of attention can affect the neural processing of visual information in the human visual cortex. In a typical experiment, identical visual stimuli are presented simultaneously to corresponding peripheral fi eld locations to the right and to the left of a central fi xation point. Subjects are instructed to direct attention covertly to the right or the left by a symbolic cue presented at the fi xation point and to detect the occurrence of a visual stimulus or, in some cases, discriminate a feature of the attended stimulus. Directing attention to the left hemifi eld increases stimulus-evoked activity in the extrastriate visual cortex of the right hemisphere, whereas directing attention to the right hemifi eld increases activity in the extrastriate visual cortex of the left hemisphere In one imaging study Earlier we noted that the attentional control network is activated during nonspatial attention. Functional brain imaging studies and single-unit recording studies in nonhuman primates have found evidence that nonspatial attention also modulates sensory cortices. One such study found that selective attention to shape, color, or speed enhanced activity in the regions of the extrastriate visual cortex that selectively process these same attributes. Attention to shape and color led to response enhancement in regions of the posterior portion of the fusiform gyrus, including area V4. Attention to speed led to response enhancement in areas MT/MST Consistent with the previously mentioned functional imaging studies, single-unit recording studies in the visual cortices have found that when attention is directed to a single stimulus in the receptive fi eld, there is often an increase in the fi ring rates of neurons that respond to the attended stimulus Microstimulation studies support the conclusion that attention-dependent changes in fi ring rate within the visual cortices result from feedback signals that are FIGURE 48.8 Attentional modulation of event related potentials (ERPs). In a typical experiment, subjects fi xate a central cross and attend either to the left or right visual fi eld. Stimuli are then presented to the left and right visual fi elds in a rapid sequence. This idealized example illustrated the common fi nding that the average ERP elicited by an attended visual fi eld stimulus contains larger P1 and N1 components. generated in the fronto-parietal attentional control network. Moore and Armstrong (2003) measured the locations in FEF where stimulating current would move the eyes, the "movement fi eld" of the stimulation site. They then reduced the stimulating current to a level too low to evoke an eye movement, and observed the effect of this stimulation on the responses of neurons in visual area V4. They found that FEF stimulation caused V4 neurons to respond more robustly to a stimulus that appeared at the movement fi eld within the V4 neuron's receptive fi eld The lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) is the thalamic station in the retinocortical projection and traditionally has been viewed as the gateway to the visual cortex. In addition to retinal afferents, the LGN receives input from multiple sources including striate cortex, the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN), and the brain stem. The LGN therefore represents the fi rst stage in the visual pathway at which cortical top-down feedback signals could affect information processing.It has proven diffi cult to study attentional response modulation in the LGN using single-cell physiology due to the small RF sizes of LGN neurons and the possible confound of small eye movements. Several single-cell physiology studies have failed to demonstrate attentional modulation in the LGN, supporting a notion that selective attention affects neural processing only at the cortical level. This notion was recently revisited using fMRI in humans (O As in visual cortex, different modulatory effects of attention were found. Neural responses to attended visual stimuli were enhanced relative to the same stimuli when unattended. As in cortex, this effect of attentional response enhancement was shown to be spatially specifi c in the LGN. And directing attention to a location in the absence of visual stimulation and in anticipation of the stimulus onset increased neural baseline activity. Together, these studies indicate that the LGN appears to be the fi rst stage in the processing of visual information that is modulated by attentional top-down signals.These studies were suited to compare the magnitude of the attention effects across the visual system. The magnitude of all attention effects increased from early to more advanced processing levels along both the ventral and dorsal pathways of visual cortex. This is consistent with the idea that attention operates through top-down signals that are transmitted via The visual stimulus appeared in the receptive fi eld for one second (RF stim). 500 ms after the onset of the visual stimulus, a low level of current was applied to a site in FEF for 50 ms (FEF stim). The response of a single V4 neuron with (gray) and without (black) FEF microstimulation appears below. The apparent gap in response refl ects the brief period during which V4 recording was paused while current was injected into FEF, when, for technical reasons, the stimulating current interfered with the ability to record action potentials. Following stimulation, the V4 neuron had elevated responses on trials when FEF was electrically stimulated, as compared to trials without FEF stimulation.cortico-cortical feedback connections in a hierarchical fashion. This idea is supported by single-cell recording studies, which have shown that attention effects in area TE of inferior temporal cortex have a latency of approximately 150 ms, whereas attention effects in V1 have a longer latency of approximately 230 ms. According to this account, one would predict smaller attention effects in the LGN than in striate cortex. Surprisingly, it was found that all attention effects tended to be larger in the LGN than in striate cortex. This fi nding suggests that attentional response modulation in the LGN is unlikely to be due solely to corticothalamic feedback from striate cortex, but may be further infl uenced by additional sources of input. In addition to corticothalamic feedback projections from V1, which comprise about 30% of its modulatory input, the LGN receives another 30% of modulatory inputs each from the TRN and the parabrachial nucleus of the brain stem. Given its afferent input the LGN may be in an ideal strategic position to serve as an early gatekeeper in attentional gain control.So far this chapter has considered the situation when attention is cued to a location (or a feature) in the visual fi eld. However, one is rarely told in advance to attend to a particular location. Normally, one needs to fi nd a particular object in a complex world that is composed of a large number of stimuli. Psychologists have used a visual search paradigm to understand how attention selects behaviorally relevant stimuli out of a group of other stimuli.In a typical task, observers are asked to search among an array of stimuli and indicate whether a particular target is present in the array. This task is easier under some conditions than others. For example, it is easy to determine whether a horizontal green bar is present in Considerable debate exists regarding the locus and nature of the computational bottleneck that causes the capacity limitations that are revealed by visual search tasks. One infl uential theory, feature integration theory (FIT, However, the idea that limited capacity occurs at early stages of processing has been challenged. For example, some studies suggest that parts of objects are integrated into wholes prior to the application of attention. Consider the task of searching for the oddly shaped object appearing at the bottom of Further evidence that features can be integrated preattentively into objects comes from the fi nding that when an observer attends to one feature of an object (e.g., its orientation), other features of the object are selected automatically as well. In a now classic study, These two perspectives are not mutually exclusive. Some feature integration may occur preattentively (e.g., Extracellular recording studies of attention in awake, behaving monkeys have revealed that the receptive fi elds of individual neurons might contribute to the limitation in visual capacity. As visual information traverses the successive cortical areas of the ventral stream that underlie object recognition , the sizes of receptive fi elds increase from less than a degree of visual arc in primary visual cortex (area V1) to about 20° of visual arc in area TE, the last purely visual area in the ventral visual processing stream (Chapter 46). Similar increases in receptive fi eld size are observed in the dorsal visual processing stream. In a typical scene, such large receptive fi elds will contain many different objects. Therefore, a likely explanation for why one cannot process many different objects in a scene simultaneously is that neurons, whose signals are limited in bandwidth, cannot simultaneously send signals about all the stimuli inside their receptive fi elds. This idea implies that processing limitations exist at all levels of processing but that they become more pronounced in higher order visual areas, where receptive fi eld sizes are larger. How then do neurons transmit signals about behaviorally relevant stimuli in their receptive fi elds?One proposal is that the selective processing of behaviorally relevant stimuli is accomplished by two interacting mechanisms: competition among potentially relevant stimuli and biases that determine the outcome of this competition. For example, when an observer is asked to detect the appearance of a target at a particular location, this task is thought to activate spatially selective feedback signals in cortical areas, such as parts of the parietal and frontal cortex discussed earlier. These cortical areas provide a taskappropriate spatial reference frame and transmit signals to the extrastriate cortex, where they bias competition in favor of stimuli that appear at the attended location. Similarly, when an observer searches for an object in a cluttered scene, feature-selective feedback is thought to bias competition in favor of stimuli that share features in common with the searched-for object. When competition is resolved, the winning stimulus controls neuronal responses, and other stimuli are effectively fi ltered out of the visual stream.Studies in monkeys have compared the effect of attention on neuronal responses with single and multiple stimuli in the receptive fi eld. Consistent with the proposal just outlined, larger changes in fi ring rate occur when multiple stimuli appear within the receptive fi eld (and one stimulus must be attended), as compared to when the attended stimulus appears alone and there is no competition to be resolved Similar results have been reported in the dorsal stream of visual processing The fi ndings just summarized support the proposal that competitive neural circuits can be biased by spatially selective feedback signals. As illustrated in Functional brain imaging studies suggest that in the human visual cortex, just as in the monkey cortex, mechanisms exist such that multiple stimuli compete for neural representation and unwanted information can be fi ltered out effects were larger in areas with larger receptive fi elds. This observation suggests that, as in the monkey visual cortex, competitive interactions occur most strongly at the level of the receptive fi eld The effects of spatially directed attention on multiple, competing visual stimuli have been studied in a variation of the same paradigm Unwanted information can not only be fi ltered out effectively by top-down mechanisms that resolve competitive interactions among multiple objects, but also by bottom-up mechanisms that are defi ned by the context of the stimuli. As we have seen earlier, if a salient stimulus is present in a cluttered scene, it will be effortlessly and quickly detected regardless of the number of distracters, suggesting that competition is biased in favor of the salient stimulus. Bottom-up infl uences related to stimulus context of a visual display, in which a single, salient stimulus pops out from a homogeneous background were examined using the same design of sequentially and simultaneously presented stimuli described earlier "Everyone knows what attention is. It is the taking possession of the mind in clear and vivid form of one out of what seem several simultaneous objects or trains of thought." Thus did William James defi ne the elusive entity commonly known as "attention." A century later, experimental neuroscience and cognitive psychology afford a closer look at the neural mechanisms enabling this "taking possession" to occur.The behavioral manifestations of attention are clearly not the result of operations in any one dedicated neural center. Selective attention affects neural activity at all levels of the visual system and other sensory systems, with the possible exception of neurons in the sensory periphery. A few structures located at the top of the visual system hierarchy in the parietal, frontal, and cingulate cortices are thought to be relatively more specialized for generating the signals that guide selective attention, and these are among the areas that are thought to provide feedback signals that infl uence sensory processing in areas that are specialized for analyzing the physical properties of the sensory environment.Answers are beginning to be available to the question of why attention is necessary in the fi rst place. A possible computational bottleneck may be built into all levels of the visual system in the form of spatial receptive fi elds. The fact that several objects within a certain spatial region can activate the same neuron reduces the ability of such neurons to transmit accurate information about each one of these objects. Mechanisms therefore are required to shrink the functional recep-tive fi eld around the object(s) that needs greater scrutiny in a particular situation. Other bottlenecks will doubtlessly be revealed in future research.Signifi cant advances have been made in understanding the ways in which the nervous system encodes and retrieves information. One focus of current research is on the understanding of learning and memory at the cellular level, where the information-encoding process can be traced to changes in neuronal properties such as membrane excitability and synaptic strength. One emerging principle is that no single universal mechanism for learning and memory exists. Instead, different memory systems (Chapter 50) can use different mechanisms. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of memory mechanisms requires an understanding of the general ways in which neurons are changed by learning and the ways in which those changes are maintained and expressed at the cellular level.Research during the past several decades on several vertebrate and invertebrate model systems has led to the development of several general principles. A list of these principles 1. Multiple memory systems are present in the brain (Chapter 50). 2. Short-term and long-term forms of learning and memory involve changes in existing neural circuits. 3. These changes may involve multiple cellular mechanisms within individual neurons. 4. Second-messenger systems play a role in mediating cellular changes. 5. Changes in membrane channels often are correlated with learning and memory. 6. Long-term memory requires new protein synthesis, whereas short-term memory does not.This chapter describes several of the types of neural and molecular mechanisms implicated in learning and memory. The chapter fi rst considers some of the paradigms that have been used to study simple forms of nonassociative and associative learning and provides an example of mechanistic analyses that have been performed in a selected invertebrate model system. The later sections of the chapter describe the mechanisms of two phenomena, which are known as long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD). Both LTP and LTD occur in forebrain structures, and LTP and LTD are thought to be mechanisms for memory storage in the central nervous system.Associative learning is a broad category that includes many of our daily learning activities that involve formation of associations among stimuli and/or responses. It usually is subdivided into classical conditioning and instrumental conditioning. Classical (or Pavlovian) conditioning is induced by a procedure in which a generally neutral stimulus, termed a conditioned stimulus (CS), is paired with a stimulus that generally elicits a response, termed an unconditioned stimulus (US). Two examples of unconditioned stimuli are food, which elicits salivation, or a shock to the foot, which elicits limb withdrawal. Instrumental (or operant) conditioning is a process by which an organism learns to associate consequences with its own behavior. In an operant conditioning paradigm, the delivery of a reinforcing stimulus is contingent upon the expression of a designated behavior. The probability that this behavior will be expressed is then altered. This chapter focuses on classical conditioning, as it is mechanistically the best understood type of associative conditioning.An astute observation by Ivan Pavlov, a Russian physiologist who had been studying digestion in dogs, led to his discovery of classical conditioning. He fi rst noticed that the mere sight of the food dish caused dogs to salivate. He continued the experiments to see if dogs would also salivate in response to a bell rung at feeding time. Pavlov trained dogs to stand in a harness and, after the sound of a bell, fed them meat powder Three examples of nonassociative learning have received the most experimental attention: habituation, dishabituation, and sensitization. Habituation is defi ned as a reduction in the response to a stimulus that is delivered repeatedly. Dishabituation refers to the restoration or recovery of a habituated response due to the presentation of another, typically strong, stimulus to the animal. Sensitization is an enhancement or augmentation of a response produced by the presentation of a strong stimulus. The following sections introduce the Aplysia and focus on the neural and molecular mechanisms of sensitization.Since the mid-1960s, the marine mollusk Aplysia has proven to be an extremely useful model system to gain insights into the neural and molecular mechanisms of simple forms of memory. Indeed, the pioneering discoveries of Eric Kandel using this animal were recognized by his receipt of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2000. A number of characteristics make Aplysia well suited for the examination of the molecular, cellular, morphological, and network mechanisms underlying neuronal modifi cations (plasticity) and learning and memory. The animal has a relatively simple nervous system with large, individually identifi able neurons that are accessible for detailed anatomical, biophysical, biochemical, and molecular studies. Neurons and neural circuits that mediate many behaviors in Aplysia have been identifi ed. In several cases, these behaviors have been shown to be modifi able by learning. Moreover, specifi c loci within neural circuits at which modifi cations occur during learning have been identifi ed, and aspects of the cellular mechanisms underlying these modifi cations have been analyzed A single sensitizing stimulus, such as a brief several second-duration electric shock, can produce a refl ex enhancement that lasts minutes (short-term sensitization), whereas prolonged training (e.g., multiple stimuli over an hour or more) produces an enhancement that lasts from days to weeks (long-term sensitization). by Pavlov, the production of saliva is monitored continuously. Presentation of meat powder reliably leads to salivation, whereas some "neutral" stimulus such as a bell initially does not. With repeated pairings of the bell and meat powder, the animal learns that the bell predicts the food and salivates in response to the bell alone. Modifi ed from A discussion of memory mechanisms can be divided into three parts: induction, expression, and maintenance. Induction refers to the initial events that trigger or initiate the modifi cation process; expression concerns how the modifi cation process ultimately is expressed; and maintenance addresses the manner in which the modifi cation is made to endure over time.Short-term (minutes) sensitization is induced when a single brief train of shocks to the body wall results in the release of modulatory transmitters, such as serotonin (5-HT), from a separate class of interneurons (IN) referred to as facilitatory neurons One consequence of this protein phosphorylation is an alteration in the properties of membrane channels. Specifi cally, the increased levels of cAMP lead to a decrease in the serotonin-sensitive potassium current [S-K + current (I K ,s)], a component of the calciumactivated K + current (I K , Ca ) and the delayed K + current (I K , V ). (See Chapter 6 for more information on these channel types.) These changes in membrane currents lead to depolarization of the membrane potential, enhanced excitability, and an increase in the duration of the action potential (i.e., spike broadening). Refl ections of enhanced excitability include an increase in the number of action potentials elicited in a sensory neuron by a fi xed extrinsic current injected into the cell or by a fi xed stimulus to the skin Cyclic AMP also appears to activate a facilitatory process that is independent of membrane potential and spike duration. This process is represented in than an action potential before the sensitizing stimulus (A2). For short-term sensitization, the enhancement of transmitter release is due, at least in part, to broadening of the action potential and an enhanced fl ow of Ca 2+ into the sensory neuron. (B) Model of a sensory neuron that depicts the multiple processes for short-term facilitation that contribute to short-term sensitization. 5-HT released from facilitatory neurons binds to at least two distinct classes of receptors on the outer surface of the membrane and leads to the transient activation of two intracellular second messengers, DAG and cAMP, and their respective kinases (PKC and PKA). These kinases affect multiple cellular processes, the combined effects of which lead to enhanced transmitter release when subsequent action potentials are fi red in the sensory neuron (see text for additional details). Modifi ed from Serotonin also acts through another class of receptors to increase the level of the second messenger diacylglycerol (DAG). DAG activates protein kinase C (PKC), which, like PKA, contributes to facilitation that is independent of spike duration (e.g., mobilization of vesicles). In addition, PKC regulates a nifedipinesensitive Ca 2+ channel (I Ca,Nif ) and the delayed K + channel (I K,V ). Thus, the delayed K + channel (I K,V ) is dually regulated by PKC and PKA. The modulation of I K,V contributes importantly to the increase in duration of the action potential Prolonged treatments of 5-HT (1.5 h) also activates mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) . However, this pathway appears to be important only for the induction of longer-term processes (see later). Of general signifi cance is the observation that a single modulatory transmitter (i.e., 5-HT) activates multiple kinase systems. The involvement of multiple second messenger systems in synaptic plasticity also appears to be a theme emerging from mammalian studies. For example, as discussed in a later section of the chapter, the induction of LTP in the CA1 area of the hippocampus appears to involve MAPK, PKC, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase II), and tyrosine kinase (reviewed in The consequences of activating these multiple second-messenger systems and modulating these various cellular processes are expressed when test stimuli elicit action potentials in the sensory neuron at various times after the presentation of the sensitizing stimuli The maintenance of short-term sensitization is dependent on the persistence of the PKA-and PKC-induced phosphorylations of the various substrate proteins.Sensitization also exists in a long-term form, which persists for at least 24 h. Whereas short-term sensitization can be produced by a single brief stimulus, the induction of long-term sensitization requires a more extensive training period over an hour or more.Both short-and long-term sensitization share some common cellular pathways during their induction. For example, both forms activate the cAMP/PKA cascade ( The role of transcription factors in long-term memory formation is not limited to the induction phase but may also extend to the consolidation phase, where consolidation is defi ned as the time window during which RNA and protein synthesis are required for converting short-to long-term memory. For example, treatment of ganglia with 5 pulses of 5-HT over a 1.5 h period to mimic sensitization training leads to the binding of CREB1 to the promoter of its own gene and induces CREB1 synthesis The combined effects of activation of CREB1 and derepression of CREB2 lead to changes in the synthesis of specifi c proteins. So far, more than 10 gene products that are regulated by sensitization training have been identifi ed, and others are likely to be found in the future. These results indicate that there is not a single memory gene or protein, but that multiple genes are regulated, and they act in a coordinated way to alter neuronal properties and synaptic strength. The following section discusses three regulated proteins of particular signifi cance.The down-regulation of a homologue of a neuronal cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), ApCAM plays a key role in long-term facilitation. This down-regulation has two components. First, the synthesis of ApCAM is reduced. Second, preexisting ApCAM is internalized via increased endocytosis. The internalization and degradation of ApCAM allow for the restructuring of the axon arbor One simplifying hypothesis is that the mechanisms underlying the expression of short-and long-term sensitization are the same, but extended in time for long-term sensitization. Some evidence supports this hypothesis. For example, long-term sensitization, like short-term sensitization, is associated with an enhancement of sensorimotor connections. In addition, K + currents and the excitability of sensory neurons are modifi ed by long-term sensitization Historically, memory has been divided into two temporal domains, short term and long term. It has become increasing clear from studies of a number of memory systems that this distinction is overly simplistic. For example, in Aplysia, Carew and colleagues In addition to intermediate-phase memory, it is likely that Aplysia has different phases of long-term memory. For example, at 24 h after sensitization training there is increased synthesis of a number of proteins, some of which are different from those whose synthesis is increased during and immediately after training. These results suggest that the memory for sensitization that persists for times greater than 24 h may be dependent on the synthesis of proteins occurring at 24 h and may have a different molecular signature than the 24-h memory.The withdrawal refl exes of Aplysia are subject to classical conditioning receptors (Chapters 9 and 11). These receptors need concurrent delivery of glutamate and depolarization in order to allow calcium to enter. The glutamate is provided by the activated sensory neuron (CS), and the depolarization is provided by the US (Antonov et al., Certain invertebrates display an enormous capacity for learning and offer particular experimental advantages for analyzing the cellular and molecular mechanisms of learning. For example, behaviors in Aplysia are mediated by relatively simple neural circuits, which can be analyzed with conventional anatomical and electrophysiological approaches. Once the circuit is specifi ed, the neural locus for the particular example of learning can be found, and biophysical, biochemical, and molecular approaches can then be used to identify mechanisms underlying the change. The relatively large size of some of these cells allows these analyses to take place at the level of individually identifi ed neurons. Individual neurons can be removed surgically and assayed for changes in the levels of second messengers, protein phosphorylation, RNA, and protein syntheses. Moreover, peptides and nucleotides can be injected into individual neurons.This chapter has focused exclusively on Aplysia, but many other invertebrates have proven to be valuable model systems for the cellular and molecular analysis of learning and memory. Each has its own unique advantages. For example, Aplysia is excellent for applying cell biological approaches to the analysis of learning and memory mechanisms. Other invertebrate model systems such as Drosophila, although not well suited for cell biological approaches because of their small neurons, offer tremendous advantages for obtaining insights into mechanisms of learning and memory through the application of genetic approaches. A frequently used protocol in Drosophila employs a two-stage differential odor-shock avoidance procedure, in which animals learn to avoid odors paired (CS+) with shock but not odors explicitly unpaired (CS-). This learning is typically retained for 4-6 h, but retention for 24 h to 1 week can be produced by a spaced training procedure. Several mutants deficient in learning have been identified. Analysis of the affected genes has revealed elements of the cAMP signaling pathway as key in learning and memory. It is now known that the formation of long-term memory requires activation of the cAMP signaling pathway, which, in turn, activates members of the CREB transcription family. These proteins appear to be the key molecular switch that enables expression of genes necessary for the formation of long-term memories. These transcription factors are also important for long-term memory in Aplysia as described above and in vertebrates (see below). See In contrast to the studies on invertebrates like Aplysia described earlier, in vertebrates it has been more diffi cult to link synaptic plasticity with specifi c examples of learning. However, one exciting and extensively studied candidate memory mechanism is the synaptic phenomenon termed long-term potentiation (LTP). This phenomenon is defi ned as a persistent increase in synaptic strength (as measured by the amplitude of the EPSP in a follower neuron) that can be induced rapidly by a brief burst of spike activity in the presynaptic afferents. The intense experimental interest in LTP is driven by the working hypothesis that this form of synaptic plasticity may participate in information storage in several brain regions. This section describes the properties of LTP and how it is studied, reviews its underlying mechanisms, and explores the possibility of linkages between LTP and learning and memory.The fi rst evidence that long-term modifi cation of mammalian synapses could be induced by experimental means appeared in 1973, when Timothy Bliss and Terje Lomo demonstrated LTP in the hippocampus of the anesthetized rabbit. Brief, high-frequency stimulation of the perforant-pathway input to the dentate preparation from the rat. Two extracellular stimulating electrodes are used to activate two nonoverlapping inputs to pyramidal neurons of the CA1 region of the hippocampus. By suitably adjusting the current intensity delivered to the stimulating electrodes, different numbers of Schaffer collateral/commissural (Sch/com) axons can be activated. In this way, one stimulating electrode was made to produce a weak postsynaptic response and the other to produce a strong postsynaptic response. Also illustrated is an extracellular recording electrode placed in the stratum radiatum (the projection zone of the Sch/com inputs) and an intracellular recording electrode in the stratum pyramidale (the cell body layer). Also indicated is the mossy fi ber projection from granule cells of the dentate gyrus (DG) to the pyramidal neurons of the CA3 region. Adapted from Within the hippocampus proper, by far the best studied synapse is that from the Schaffer collateral/ commissural (Sch/com) fi bers of the CA3 pyramidal cells to the CA1 pyramidal cells The CA3-CA1 synapses exhibit a form of LTP characterized by "classical" properties that have been termed "cooperativity," "associativity," and "input specifi city" Cooperativity refers to the fact that the probability of inducing LTP, or the magnitude of the resulting change, increases with the number of stimulated afferents. Weak high-frequency stimulation, which activates fewer afferents, often fails to induce LTP Associativity was shown in preparations in which two distinct axonal inputs converged onto the same postsynaptic target. Consider the interactions between two stimulus pathways, one termed the weak pathway with a small number of stimulated afferents, and the other, termed the strong pathway, with a large number of stimulated afferents Input specifi city means that LTP is restricted to only the inputs that received the tetanic stimulation. The unstimulated weak pathway was not facilitated after the tetanus to the strong pathway How can these classical properties of LTP in the CA1 region of the hippocampus be explained? In the late 1940s, the Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb (1949) formulated a postulate regarding the conditions that cause synapses to change. His thinking proved to be infl uential and guided later experiments that probed the mechanisms behind LTP. According to Hebb's postulate: Could the classical properties of LTP all be consequences of synapses that obey a Hebbian rule? Possibly so if a critical amount of postsynaptic depolarization were a necessary condition for inducing LTP in active synapses. In this case, cooperativity would result when enough input fi bers were stimulated to produce the critical amount of postsynaptic depolarization. Associativity would emerge from the fact that the strong input caused suffi cient depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane during the presynaptic activity in the weak input. Input specifi city would occur because LTP was induced only in those inputs to a neuron that were active at the same time that the cell was suffi ciently depolarized by the strong input to that neuron. In other words, these classical phenomena could all be manifestations of a single underlying Hebbian mechanism at the CA3-CA1 synapse.Not all forms of LTP are Hebbian, however. Examples of non-Hebbian LTP can be found at the mossy fi ber-CA3 synapse in the hippocampus and at the parallel fi ber-Purkinje cell synapse in the cerebellum. These results indicate that the classical properties of cooperativity, associativity, and input specifi city are not universal.It is currently thought that there are multiple mechanisms or at least multiple second-messenger pathways that can lead to persistent synaptic enhancement. Multiple mechanisms may also contribute to expression and maintenance.It is generally agreed that the induction of LTP depends on an increase in the intracellular concentration of calcium ions ([Ca 2+ ] i ) in some key compartment of pre-and/or postsynaptic cells It is currently thought that many different pathways modulate or control Recall that the classical form of LTP in the CA1 region of the hippocampus has properties that can be explained in terms of a Hebbian mechanism. For this form of LTP, considerable evidence shows a role for the NMDAR  FIGURE 49.9 Events leading to some forms of LTP and LTD.The schematic depicts a postsynaptic spine with various sources of Ca 2+ . The NMDA receptor channel complex admits Ca 2+ only after depolarization removes the Mg 2+ block in the presence of bound glutamate. Calcium may also enter through the ligand-gated AMPA receptor channel or voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC), which may be located on the spine head or dendritic shaft. Calcium pumps (P), located on the spine head, neck, and dendritic shaft, are hypothesized to help isolate Ca 2+ concentration changes in the spine head from those in the dendritic shaft.The NMDAR has two properties that immediately suggest the nature of its role in LTP induction at Hebbian synapses At this point, you should recall the distinction between the properties of the NMDAR and those of the AMPAR (a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor) (see Chapters 9 and 11 for details), which also are found in the postsynaptic membrane. The AMPAR does not exhibit voltage-dependent Mg 2+ block, has relatively lower Ca 2+ permeability, and the AMPAR-mediated conductance is essentially voltage independent. Released glutamate can potentially act on both the AMPARs and the NMDARs associated with the membrane on the dendritic spine In qualitative terms, one can understand how these molecular events could help account for the properties of cooperativity, associativity, and spatiotemporal specifi city. Active synapses release glutamate, which can bind to the NMDAR, causing Ca 2+ infl ux into dendritic spines on the postsynaptic cell. This Ca 2+ infl ux acts locally and results in input-specifi c LTP. However, the Ca 2+ infl ux occurs only when the synaptic input is strong enough to depolarize the postsynaptic membrane suffi ciently to relieve the Mg 2+ block, giving rise to cooperativity (see NMDAR-independent LTP. Most of the preceding accounts of the Hebbian, NMDAR-dependent form of LTP apply only to certain synapses under some conditions, and even then it may be only one aspect of the story The general case may be that both NMDARdependent and NMDAR-independent forms of LTP may coexist in the same brain region, among different classes of synaptic inputs onto the same postsynaptic neuron, and even among the same class of synaptic inputs to the same postsynaptic neuron.A common requirement for the induction of both early LTP and late LTP at the CA3-CA1 synapse is the elevation of levels of intracellular calcium in the postsynaptic (i.e., CA1) neuron. Additional steps are involved in the induction of L-LTP, however. As was the case for the induction of long-term facilitation of the sensorimotor synapse in Aplysia, activation of PKA appears to be necessary for the induction of L-LTP The mechanisms underlying the induction of longterm neuronal plasticity and memory seem to be highly conserved across species. NMDAR-dependent LTP has been characterized at the sensorimotor synapse of Aplysia Up to this point, evidence related to early events in the causal chain that triggers the induction process has been emphasized. Another question follows naturally: What biochemical and biophysical changes incorporate this modifi cation once it has been triggered? Most of the ideas about enhanced synaptic transmission concern either increased transmitter release or increased receptivity to released transmitter. The former entails presynaptic changes, and the latter, postsynaptic. Although some of the induction mechanisms discussed previously implicated a postsynaptic increase in [Ca 2+ ] i , this does not necessarily imply that expression must also be postsynaptic. Ample evidence is available for ongoing two-way communication across the synaptic cleft, so a postsynaptic trigger could, in principle, give rise to a pre-and/or postsynaptic modifi cation (see also The search for the biological basis of learning and memory has led many of the leading neuroscientists of the twentieth century to direct their efforts to investigating the synapse. The focus of most recent work on LTP (and indeed the bulk of this chapter) has been to elucidate the mechanisms underlying changes in synaptic strength. Although changes in synaptic strength are certainly ubiquitous, they are not the exclusive means for the expression of neuronal plasticity associated with learning and memory. Both short-term and long-term sensitization and classical conditioning of defensive refl exes in Aplysia are associated with an enhancement of excitability of the sensory neurons in addition to changes in synaptic strength. Classical and operant conditioning of feeding behavior in Aplysia also leads to changes in excitability of neuron B51. Interestingly, in this case there is a bidirectional control. The excitability of B51 is increased by operant conditioning, whereas it is decreased by classical conditioning. Changes in excitability of sensory neurons in the mollusc Hermissenda are produced by classical conditioning. In vertebrates, classical conditioning of eyeblink refl exes produces changes in the excitability of cortical neurons. Eye-blink conditioning also produces changes in the spike afterpotential of hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Finally, as described in their original report on LTP, Bliss and Lomo found that the expression of LTP was also associated with an apparent enhanced excitability. VERTEBRATE STUDIES: LONG-TERM POTENTIATION associated with an increase in the number of functional AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic neuron (mechanism No. 5 in Regardless of the ultimate nature and locus of the modifi cation that gives rise to LTP expression, the more general problem remains of how a synaptic change can endure over long periods of time in the face of constant molecular turnover.Maintenance of Early LTP. The maintenance of E-LTP is due to the persistence of phosphorylation of substrate proteins involved in expression mechanisms (see earlier discussion). This phosphorylation, in turn, is regulated by the engagement of protein kinases and phosphatases. For E-LTP, autonomously active forms of PKC and CaM kinase II appear to be particularly important.Maintenance of Late LTP. The maintenance of persistent forms of LTP ultimately involves alterations in gene expression and changes in protein synthesis. High-frequency electrical stimulation in the rat hippocampus raises levels of specifi c mRNAs that encode transcription factors (e.g., fos, zif268), cytoskeletal proteins (e.g., arc), and signal transduction molecules such as CaM kinase II. Moreover, protein synthesis inhibitors block the late phase of LTP but not earlier phases. One interesting observation is that brain slices that received protein synthesis inhibitors just 2 h after high-frequency stimulation showed no decline in late LTP, indicating that there is a critical of a synapse can be potentiated through at least six mechanisms. First, there could be an increase in the fraction (release probability) of available presynaptic vesicles that undergo exocytosis. For example, in mechanism 1, two out of four available vesicles are released (i.e., 50% release probability), in contrast to the normal synapse, where only one out of four vesicles is released (i.e., 25% release probability). Second, there could be an increase in the number of release sites at the presynaptic neuron (mechanism 2). Third, the synapse could be potentiated through an increase in the number of vesicles available for release. For example, at a release site with eight vesicles, two of them will be exocytosed (instead of one) (mechanism 3), even if the release probability (25%) is the same as at the normal synapse. Fourth, there could be an increase in the sensitivity of the preexisting receptors to presynaptically released neurotransmitter or a greater conductance of the channel (mechanism 4). Fifth, there could be an increase in the number of functional receptors (illustrated as an increase from two active receptors at the normal synapse to four at the potentiated synapse; mechanism 5). Finally, the synapse could also be potentiated through coordinated presynaptic and postsynaptic morphological changes, such as the growth of new synaptic contacts between the same pair of neurons (mechanism 6). Adapted from Wang et al. time window during which protein synthesis might be necessary to maintain long-term plasticity. One new protein that is synthesized is proten kinase Mzeta (PKMz). PKMz is necessary for maintenance of L-LTP and seems necessary for maintaining the increase in postsynaptic AMPA receptors Although the involvement of new protein synthesis is consistent with the data, it immediately raises the problem of synaptic input specifi city. If neural activity ultimately affects gene expression in the nucleus, then the mRNAs and proteins produced in the somatic compartment could, in principle, travel to any synapse within the cell. The problem is how to modify only the appropriate synapses and maintain synapse specifi city. One solution is for the specifi c kinase(s) activated locally during a tetanus to phosphorylate one or more substrates and that these substrates act to "tag" the synapse as one that has been potentiated. For example, a stimulus that activates one CA1 synaptic input suffi ciently to induce L-LTP can lead to the induction of L-LTP by a weaker stimulus to a second synaptic input even when that second input is by itself suffi cient to only induce E-LTP. This effect is limited to a time window where the second weaker stimulus occurs within an hour or so of the stronger one. These results indicate that the second stimulus can lead to the transient (∼1 h) activation of a "tag" that can specifi cially "capture" "plasticity factors" induced by the strong stimulus Support of a more permanent synaptic modifi cation might require a self-perpetuating tag and/or a biochemical positive feedback loop that maintains synaptic strength Long-term potentiation has properties that have long been considered necessary for the encoding and retrieval of information. Hebbian forms of LTP exhibit associativity, which appears to be a desirable property, and all forms of LTP appear to be well suited to rapid learning. One of the more important challenges entails linking LTP (and LTD, see later) to learning and memory Several different experimental strategies have been used to search for links between LTP and learning. These include correlating changes in synaptic effi cacy with learning and blocking or saturating LTP mechanisms to show that learning has been blocked. Correlating synaptic enhancement with memory has been possible in several systems such as in amygdala circuits that mediate fear conditioning (see Chapter 50). However, there has been only limited success so far. The fi rst obstacle to surmount is the "needle in the haystack" problem. The synaptic changes underlying learning are presumably rather specifi c and localized. Consequently, it is diffi cult to place a recording electrode in the correct anatomical location. Moreover, as described later, learning may involve decreases as well as increases in synaptic strength. Coarse recording techniques might see no net change. Saturation of LTP by the massive stimulation of afferents has blocked learning, but the concern here is that the saturation may affect the basic operation of the circuit. The most widely used approach has been to block LTP with pharmacological or gene knockout techniques. This approach has generated many successes but also some striking dissociations, as blocking experiments have two problems. First, it is diffi cult to be sure that the agent used to block LTP does not cause some secondary effect. Thus, if memory is blocked successfully, it may be because of a block of some other process critical for memory and not the block of LTP. Second, if, for example, an agent that blocks NMDARdependent LTP fails to block learning, it may not necessarily imply that LTP does not mediate learning, but rather that the animal simply has used another non-NMDAR-independent memory mechanism to solve the problem.Some of the more promising work in this area has come from studies of genetically engineered knockout mice. The fi rst generation of knockouts prevented the expression of some factor that was thought to be necessary for LTP, such as CaM kinase-II. Although these studies were intriguing, they suffered from the fact that the consequences of a gene knockout might alter brain development and might not be confi ned to a specifi c part of the brain under study. Some of these problems have been overcome in a second generation of knockouts that have temporal as well as spatial specifi city. For example, temporal and spatial control of gene expression can now be achieved using binary transgene systems such as tetracycline transactivating systems and Cre/LoxP recombination systems. The NMDAR gene in only CAI pyramidal cells of the hippocampus has been knocked out using the Crc/LoxP system Recently, learning in rats was verifi ed to induce hippocampal LTP LTD is believed by many to be the mechanism by which learning is encoded in the cerebellum Some forms of LTD appear to be mediated by the NMDAR and these forms appear to be due to dephosphorylation of AMPAR subunits, which decreases their conductance and hence the synaptic effi cacy, as well as endocytosis of AMPARs, which decreases their surface number and hence the synaptic effi cacy. In addition, NMDAR-independent forms of LTD exist. These often depend on activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors. For example, NMDAR-independent LTD in the parallel fi ber input to Purkinje cells in the cerebellum is induced by the combined increase in intracellular levels of Ca 2+ (by activity) in postsynaptic Purkinje cells and activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors produced by the release of glutamate from parallel fi bers.The form of LTD may vary in different brain regions and sometimes among different inputs to the same brain region. Even within the CA1 region, the Sch/ com input may exhibit both NMDAR-dependent and NMDAR-independent forms of LTD.Calcium levels in the dendritic spines appear to be a common locus for the induction on NMDARdependent LTP and LTD. For example, at the Sch/com input to CA1, both LTP and LTD can be blocked by injecting Ca 2+ chelators into the postsynaptic cell. If both LTP and LTD are triggered by Ca 2+ entry, then how are their induction processes different? Presumably, more Ca 2+ infl ux occurs during an LTPinducing HFS than during an LTD-inducing LFS. One formal molecular model developed by John Lisman incorporates this Ca 2+ -dependent, bidirectional control of synaptic strength. In this model, high LTP and LTD can be readily reversed. If low frequency stimulation (LFS) is applied after a synapse is potentiated by high frequency stimulation (HFS), the synaptic strength decreases. This phenomenon is called depotentiation. In contrast, if HFS is applied after a synapse is depressed by LFS, the synaptic strength increases. This phenomenon is called dedepression. Accumulating evidence indicates that the mechanisms of depotentiation differ from that of LTD, and the mechanisms of dedepression differ from that of LTP.The understanding of LTP and LTD is evolving rapidly The relationship between the synaptic changes and the behavior of conditioned refl exes can be straightforward because the locus for the plastic change is part of the mediating circuit. Thus, the change in the strength of the sensorimotor synapse in Aplysia can be related to the memory for sensitization (e.g., A simple network that can store and "recognize" patterns is illustrated in cuitry in the CA3 region of the hippocampus. In this example, six different input projections make synaptic connections with the dendrites of each of six postsynaptic neurons Note that the "memory" for the pattern does not reside in any one synapse or in any one cell. Rather, it is distributed throughout the network at multiple sites. The properties of these types of autoassociation networks have been examined by James Anderson, Teuvo Kohonen, David Marr, Edmond Rolls, David Wilshaw, and their colleagues and found to exhibit a number of phenomena that would be desirable for a biological recognition memory system. For example, such networks exhibit pattern completion. If a partial input pattern is presented, the autoassociation network can complete the pattern in the sense that it can produce an output that is approximately what is expected for the full input pattern. Thus, any part of the stored pattern can be used as a cue to retrieve the complete pattern. For the example of The concept of distributed representation of memory crosses multiple levels of organization of memory systems. Multiple brain systems are involved in memory, and memory is distributed among synapses in a particular memory circuit The previous chapter summarized the cellular and molecular mechanisms of memory and explained that individual neurons contain complex machinery capable of altering membrane excitability and synaptic strength. These neuronal building blocks are the fundamental basis of plasticity, and this plasticity supports behavior through memory systems, complex circuits involving a large number of interconnected neurons. The present chapter focuses on the major memory systems of the brain and considers how each system supports learning. The chapter begins with a brief history of the concept of multiple forms of memory, followed by a summary of each of the major memory systems of the mammalian brain The history of memory systems can be usefully framed by the early question of whether a specifi c memory could be localized or whether it would be distributed throughout the brain. Even early on there was evidence that the answer might lie somewhere between the extremes. In the 1920s, the psychologist Karl Lashley conducted a series of experiments in which he carefully damaged various areas in the cerebral cortex of rats who had learned a route through a simple maze. He found that the specifi c location of the brain damage did not relate to memory performance as well as the total amount of cortex damaged and concluded that memory was distributed throughout the brain. Yet a short time later, the neurosurgeon Wilder Penfi eld found that when he stimulated various areas of the brains of awake epileptic patients (in order to identify functional areas deemed too important to be removed during surgery to treat the epilepsy), stimulation in some brain regions, particularly in the temporal lobe, led the patient to experience specifi c memories. He reasoned that, if focal stimulations bring specifi c memories to mind, then individual brain regions might contain individual memories. The psychologist Donald Hebb offered a reconciliation for these diverse fi ndings by suggesting that thoughts and memories were supported by "cell assemblies," networks of neurons, and that learning experiences resulted in changes in the connections between cells . Thus, to the extent that a change at an individual juncture between cells (i.e., a synapse) recorded experience, memory was localized. Yet to the extent that full memories resulted from a reactivation of an entire cell assembly, memory was distributed.Although it was not appreciated at this time that different networks, or "cell assemblies," might support different forms of memory, several philosophers and psychologists had already suggested that an important difference existed between the type of everyday memory that one brings to mind in the form of words, pictures, or sounds and the type of memory that accrues with our actions as habits and dispositions. For example, in the early nineteenth century the philosopher Maine de Biran distinguished between representative memory, which he imagined as the recollection of ideas and events, mechanical memory, which he described as the acquisition of habits and skills, and sensitive memory, which he described as the acquisition of affective values for otherwise neutral stimuli. In the Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition late nineteenth century, the philosopher and psychologist William James similarly envisioned walking, writing, fencing, singing, and other habitual routines as being fundamentally different from memories produced by conscious recollection.Thus, by the mid-twentieth century, the work of philosophers, psychologists, and neurosurgeons would have seemed to create an intellectual readiness for the idea of multiple memory systems in the brain. However, at this time the study of memory was guided not by the pursuit of brain systems but by behavioral psychology, a fi eld based on the principle that the opaque details of brain and consciousness were best set aside as more productive research was accomplished by focusing on observable behavior. Despite this principled disregard of the brain, a distinction emerged between a learning based on stimulusresponse habit-like learning, such as that described by Clark Hull, and a more cognitive stimulus-stimulus form of learning, such as that described by Edward Tolman. Nevertheless, both ideas were strongly entrenched in a behaviorist tradition and were based on the idea that memory was a single capacity-they disagreed on only how to best depict that capacity. Although behavioral psychology did not actually argue against the idea that particular brain areas might be specialized for particular kinds of memory, its steadfast insistence that the details of the brain be ignored created a vacuum of relevant data. Thus, despite the contributions of earlier work, there was no clear evidence that brain areas are specialized to support different forms of memory.Incontrovertible evidence that at least one brain region was specialized to support everyday memory came from a man who underwent brain surgery to treat severe epilepsy and who became perhaps the most famous patient in neuroscience In one sense, the surgery was a success. The frequency and severity of the seizures were reduced. In another sense, the outcome was tragic. On April 26, 1955, Brenda Milner, a colleague of both Penfi eld and Hebb, conducted a neuropsychological examination of patient H.M. The profound memory impairment was immediately obvious. H.M. gave the date as March, 1953 and his age as 27 (2 years younger than his actual age). He performed poorly on memory for short stories, word lists, pictures, and a wide range of other materials. Remarkably, it was unclear that he even remembered that he had undergone brain surgery. The severity of H.M.'s amnesia was shocking-he showed almost no capacity for new learning. Also, the fact that the brain damage was known to be confi ned to a particular region (the medial temporal lobes) added to the intrigue. Yet the observation that a major neurological defi cit followed resection of a substantial amount of brain tissue was perhaps not surprising. Indeed, earlier reports already had described brain damaged individuals with memory impairments. Instead, the reason that H.M.'s case ushered in the modern era of research on memory systems came from the four aspects of his mental capacity that remained intact.First, formal testing identifi ed that cognitive abilities other than memory were intact. H.M.'s IQ score generally was unaffected by the surgery, and a battery of tests found no defi cits in perception, abstract thinking, or reasoning ability. These intact abilities indicted that memory could be separated from perception and intelligence. Second, H.M. could hold on to small amounts of information as long as he was actively rehearsing the information. This fi nding suggested that the ability to maintain information online (now usually referred to as working memory) was distinct from the ability to make a lasting record in the brain (Chapter 51). Third, H.M.'s childhood memories were relatively intact. This fi nding suggested that, although the medial temporal lobes might be important for forming new memories, this region was unlikely to be the fi nal storage site for memory. Fourth, H.M. had an intact ability to acquire new motor skill learning H.M. has participated in numerous studies in the decades since his surgery and has provided invaluable insights into the organization of memory systems in the brain. However, studies of other amnesic patients have also been crucial to the emergence of the current understanding of memory and the brain. For example, a later study by Neal they were being viewed in a mirror. Similar to H.M.'s improvement in mirror tracing, the group of amnesic patients steadily improved in the speed with which they could read the mirror-reversed words despite having great trouble remembering the practice sessions. The study helped to show that a great deal of learning can occur outside the scope of conscious recollection and that this nonconscious learning is not limited to motor skill learning. Cohen and Squire borrowed terminology from work in artifi cial intelligence Another amnesic patient, patient R.B., helped to show that damage limited to the hippocampus could result in substantial memory impairment Soon after the report on patient H.M., researchers began work in experimental animals, such as rats and monkeys, in an attempt to create a model of human amnesia. Initially, the separate lines of investigation on humans and animals were divergent and suggested to some that the functions of the hippocampus might differ between species. However, subsequent fi ndings from these two areas converged, both in their characterizations of the kind of memory that is dependent on the hippocampal region and in their identifi cation of functional domains and anatomical pathways associated with other types of memory. In early studies, this line of work focused particularly on the hippocampus. In one proposal, O'Keefe and Nadel (1978) summarized a large body of literature on the effects of hippocampal damage on different behavioral tasks and concluded that animals with damage to the hippocampus are severely impaired at many forms of spatial learning. It is now generally believed that the hippocampus is important for nonspatial as well as spatial memory, yet this early proposal added to ongoing work in humans and monkeys by identifying several key properties of hippocampus-dependent memory in experimental animals. In particular, they characterized this kind of memory as rapidly acquired and driven by curiosity rather than by rewards and punishments, properties that are consistent with characterizations of hippocampus-dependent memory in humans.Our understanding of memory systems has advanced greatly since H.M.'s surgery and it is still unfolding. The study of amnesia has provided insights not only about the role of the hippocampal memory system in declarative memory but also about the ability of other memory systems to support learning in the absence of conscious recollection. A large body of work, including research on humans and on experimental animals, has allowed researchers to understand better the unique contributions of the striatum, cerebellum, amygdala, and cerebral cortex to different forms of memory. Thus, we now know that the hippocampus anchors only one of several memory systems in the brain and that each of these brain structures are components of other memory systems that contribute to our ability to benefi t from experience. The following sections provide an overview of these systems.The following sections consider the best understood memory systems of the brain. The discussion focuses on individual structures that play central roles in each of the different systems and presents separate sections on the hippocampus, striatum, cerebellum, amygdala, and cerebral cortex A memory system is most usefully defi ned in psychological terms as well as anatomical terms. That is, a memory system is most clearly identifi ed by both a distinct circuitry and a unique set of operating characteristics. Memory systems are not separated according to stimulus modality (e.g., auditory vs. visual modality) or between response modalities (e.g., manual vs. verbal responses). Instead, the critical distinctions involve how each system's anatomy and physiology support a particular type of memory representation in terms of its organization and psychological characteristics. Finally, memory systems collaborate, compete, or operate in parallel to support behavior in the course of one's day-to-day activities, and this issue will be considered in the fi nal section of the chapter.The hippocampal memory system includes the hippocampus (defi ned here as the CA fi elds, dentate gyrus, and subiculum) and the entorhinal, perirhinal, and postrhinal cortices in the adjacent parahippocampal region (the postrhinal cortex is referred to as the parahippocampal cortex in primates; The anatomy of the hippocampal memory system in monkeys and rats. The hippocampal memory system includes the hippocampus (CA fi elds, dentate gyrus, and subiculum) and the parahippocampal region, which includes the entorhinal cortex, the perirhinal cortex, and the parahippocampal cortex. The hippocampal memory system also includes midline diencephalic nuclei. Multiple association areas in the cerebral cortex send outputs that converge on cortical areas in the parahippocampal region, which in turn sends its outputs to the hippocampus. The output path involves return projections from the hippocampus to the surrounding parahippocampal region, which in turn projects back to the same cortical association areas. From Damage to the hippocampus and parahippocampal region produces anterograde amnesia, a memory defi cit characterized by an inability to make lasting memories of one's daily experiences. That is, the hippocampal memory system ordinarily supports remembering of new facts and events and makes this information subsequently available for conscious recollection. This capacity is called declarative memory. In most amnesic patients, the defi cit in declarative memory extends to both remembering specifi c personal events (episodic memory) and learning new facts (semantic memory). Their defi cit encompasses all stimulus modalities and impacts nonverbal expression as well as verbal report. Moreover, amnesic patients are impaired whenever the memory task requires the explicit expression of memory, as in tests of free recall or recognition memory. Further, damage to the hippocampus and parahippocampal region results in loss of memory acquired for some period before the damage. This memory impairment is referred to as retrograde amnesia.Amnesia resulting from damage restricted to the hippocampus and parahippocampal region is highly selective in four important ways, the same four ways discussed earlier with regard to the intact abilities of patient H.M. First, perceptual, motor, and intellectual functions are intact. Across a broad range of neuropsychological tests, amnesic patients perform well on assessments of sensory capacities, motor coordination, intelligence, and language performance. Second, memory acquired long before the onset of amnesia is typically intact. The preservation of these remotely acquired memories generally is thought to be the consequence of a consolidation process in which the hippocampus plays a critical role for a prolonged period, after which retrieval of memories can be supported by other areas, including the neocortex. Thus, the impact of retrograde amnesia is typically time limited. The process of consolidation is discussed in more detail later. Third, the capacity for immediate memory is typically intact in amnesic patients, and, just as in the case for healthy individuals, they can extend the contents of immediate memory in time through rehearsal or elaboration, a capacity often referred to as working memory (Chapter 52). Amnesic patients can immediately reproduce a list of six or seven numbers as well as healthy individuals, but the memory defi cit becomes evident as soon as immediate memory span is exceeded or after a delay is interposed that includes some distraction to interrupt rehearsal.Fourth, the various forms of memory that are supported by brain systems outside the hippocampal memory system are intact in amnesic patients. For example, amnesic patients demonstrate normal acquisition of a broad variety of tasks in which memory is expressed through behavioral performance such as in the mirror-guided tracing task and the mirror-reversed word reading task described earlier in the chapter. Other examples include artifi cial grammar learning and improving reaction times on a repetitive sequence of fi nger taps. One profoundly amnesic patient, patient E.P., has a memory impairment and brain damage very similar to that of patient H.M. In other examples, performance on more complicated tasks came to resemble that of healthy individuals despite the fact that the learning was supported by a type of nonconscious and relatively infl exible type of learning. For example, in one study E.P. was shown eight pairs of objects one at a time, each pair containing a correct object and an incorrect object. He slowly learned to pick up the correct object in each pair and after 18 weeks was able to select the correct object almost every time These studies with patient E.P. illustrate that although some examples of memory supported by structures outside the hippocampal memory system can be simple and refl exive, other examples can be more complex and can include acquisition of new verbal information and biases for one of the response choices that is readily available. These studies also highlight by contrast the characteristics of memory supported by the hippocampal memory system. Memories formed via the hippocampal system typically are acquired rapidly, fl exible, and available to conscious recollection.Functional brain imaging studies in humans, including functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and positron emission tomography (PET), have shown that the hippocampal memory system is engaged in a variety of declarative memory tasks. For example, in one of the earliest studies, increased activity was observed in the hippocampus and parahippocampal region when participants viewed previously unseen photographs as compared to when participants viewed photographs that they had already seen on multiple occasions Neuroscientists have used a specifi c, carefully selected set of behavioral tests in developing a nonhuman primate model of human amnesia to identify the particular medial temporal lobe structures that support declarative memory. The tasks involve learning about three-dimensional objects or complex pictures. In one task, delayed nonmatching to sample, subjects are shown an object once and then, after a delay, are shown two objects (the original object and a new one). The task of the monkeys is to select the new object Using this animal model, investigators were able to identify the structures of the medial temporal lobe critical to supporting declarative memory. In H.M. the damage included the amygdala, the hippocampus, and the surrounding parahippocampal region. However, studies with monkeys have shown that the amygdala is not a part of the declarative memory system. In addition, the severity of memory impairment depends on the extent and locus of damage within the medial temporal lobe. Damage limited to the hippocampus, or to its major connections through the fornix, produces only a modest impairment. In contrast, damage that includes the adjacent cortices produces severe amnesia. Thus, the perirhinal and parahippocampal cortical regions themselves make major contributions to memory, and the hippocampus itself is a critical component of the system. Particularly compelling evidence about the role of the hippocampus in recognition memory has come from studies using a test known as the visual paired-comparison task Studies with rodents have also offered insights into the nature of memory representations in networks of hippocampal neurons. Many studies in rats have demonstrated that damage to the hippocampus results in defi cits in a variety of spatial learning and memory tasks. A particularly useful example is place learning in the Morris water maze task Although these data indicate an essential role for the hippocampus in spatial learning, all forms of spatial learning are not dependent on the hippocampus. For example, rats with hippocampal damage can learn simple spatial discriminations, such as whether  The delayed nonmatching-to-sample task using unique objects as stimuli. The subject initially is presented with a single novel object as the sample and must displace the object. This is followed by a variable delay during which the subject cannot see any objects. In the subsequent recognition test, two objects are presented, one of which is the same as the sample and the other of which is novel. Correct performance requires the subject to recognize and avoid the sample object and instead choose the novel one to receive a food reward. (B) Visual paired comparison task. During the sample phase the monkey looks at two identical pictures. In the test phase, one of the sample pictures is represented along with a novel picture. Memory for the repeated picture is inferred by measuring the subject's tendency to look away from the repeated picture and toward the new picture.to turn left rather than right in a T-shaped maze. However they are impaired if they are forced initially to visit either the left or the right arm of the maze, and then asked to remember that experience and choose to visit the opposite arm. Rats with hippocampal damage can also learn to locate the escape platform in the Morris water maze when they are trained to fi nd the platform from a single starting point. However, they cannot learn if trials from different starting points are intermixed. These studies show that rats with hippocampal damage can sometimes use spatial memory to guide performance, but they cannot organize spatial information gained from different episodes to express memory fl exibly according to the demands on a particular trial.Other experimental evidence indicates that the hippocampus is also critically involved in the organization and fl exible expression of nonspatial memories. For example, in one experiment intact rats and rats with damage to the hippocampus were trained to dig through sand mixed with one of a list of odors to obtain a cereal reward The other test, a test for symmetry, measured the ability to recognize associated odors when they were presented in the reverse of their training order. For example, if B is associated with C, is C associated with B? Intact rats showed strong transitivity and successfully inferred an association between A and C that had been learned only indirectly. In contrast, rats with selective hippocampal damage were severely impaired in that they showed no evidence of transitivity. In the symmetry test, healthy rats showed their associations were indeed symmetrical. In contrast, rats with hippocampal damage again were severely impaired, showing no detectable capacity for symmetry. Correspondingly, in humans the hippocampus is activated during retrieval of indirect associations during the same transitive inference judgment Consistent with this view, numerous recording studies in rats, monkeys, and humans have shown that hippocampal cells also fi re in association with visual, auditory, and olfactory stimuli, as well as combinations of these stimuli and the places where they occur,  suggesting that hippocampal neurons represent important stimuli in the context in which they are remembered Observations also suggest that hippocampal neurons can represent sequences of events and places that compose episodic memories. For example, evidence of episodic-like coding was found in a study when rats performed a spatial alternation task on a T maze traversed the stem of the "T" and then selected either the left-or the right-choice arm. To alternate successfully, the rats were required to distinguish between their left-turn and right-turn experiences and to use the memory for their most recent previous experience so they could turn in the opposite direction on the next trial. Different hippocampal cells fi red as the rats passed through the sequence of locations within the maze during each trial. These cells could be considered canonical place cells. However, in addition, the fi ring patterns of many of the cells depended on whether the rat was in the midst of a left-or right-turn episode, even when the rat was in the stem of the T and running similarly on both types of trials. Although the majority of the cells strongly preferred one trial type, most of the cells fi red at least to some extent when the rat was at the same point in the stem on either trial type. Thus, the hippocampus encoded the left-turn and right-turn experiences using distinct representations, and these representations included information that could link them by their common features. These results suggest that the representations of event sequences, linked by codings of their common events and places, could constitute the substrate of a network of episodic memories, consistent with the idea that the hippocampus has a broad role in declarative memory.Patients with amnesia due to medial temporal lobe damage suffer not only a defi cit in learning new material (anterograde amnesia), but also loss of memories that were acquired before the brain damage (retrograde amnesia). Importantly, the retrograde defi cit is time-limited, and material acquired shortly before the damage is affected most severely, whereas items learned earlier in life are relatively spared. For example, the profoundly amnesic patient E.P. Retrograde amnesia is another aspect of the amnesic syndrome that has been studied extensively in experimental animals. For example, studies have also shown that simple object discriminations that were learned by monkeys shortly before medial temporal lobe damage are poorly retained, but discriminations learned remotely are spared. This pattern of memory impairment has been replicated in a variety of tasks in humans, monkeys, rabbits, rats, and mice and is thought to refl ect a process of memory consolidation .The term consolidation has been used to characterize two kinds of brain events that affect the stability of memory after learning. One event involves the fi xation of plasticity within synapses over a period of minutes or hours through a sequence of protein synthesis and morphological changes at synapses (Chapter 49). The other event involves a reorganization of memories, which occurs over weeks to years following new learning. This prolonged consolidation occurs in the hippocampal memory system and is thought to involve interactions between the hippocampus, parahippocampal region, and the cerebral cortex. Several models have been proposed to account for how the hippocampus might interact with other brain regions over a prolonged period in memory consolidation Recent studies using molecular markers of neuronal activity and synaptic change have reported evidence consistent with this idea. For example, one study of maze learning in mice observed that these markers were found in high numbers in the hippocampus one day after learning but their numbers were much lower 30 days later There has long been interest in the role of sleep and dreaming in memory, and one idea has been that processes might occur during sleep that promotes the consolidation of hippocampus-dependent memories. Although the benefi t of sleep to nonconscious examples of learning is generally accepted, the status of hippocampus-dependent memory is less certain Amnesia associated with damage to the hippocampal memory system in humans is characterized by an inability to retain and consciously recollect memories of facts and events. Studies with animal models of amnesia memory provide a framework for thinking about hippocampal function in terms of memories that are represented as sequences of events remembered in the context in which they occurred and that are organized according to relations among distinct experiences. Furthermore, hippocampus-dependent memory is accessible through a variety of routes and forms of behavioral expression and supports the capacity to make generalizations and inferences from memory.The striatum is a major component of the basal ganglia and is involved with reward and motivation (Chapter 43) as well as with motor control (Chapter 31). The focus of the present section is the role of the striatum, particularly the dorsal striatum, in memory. The striatum receives its cortical inputs from many areas of the cerebral cortex are minimal projections from this system to the brain stem motor nuclei and none to the spinal motor apparatus, which suggests the system operates mainly to modify cortical motor representations rather than control behavior through direct motor outputs.The idea that the striatum is critical for many forms of stimulus-response habit learning was introduced in studies in experimental animals that dissociated this system from other memory systems, such as the hippocampal memory system. For example, in one study the role of the striatum in learning specifi c behavioral responses was demonstrated using a simple T maze apparatus where two possible strategies in solving the maze were compared directly response and instead showed that they were relying on the place strategy. The results indicated that animals normally develop an initial place strategy that depends on the hippocampus and do so prior to acquiring a habit-like response strategy. With overtraining, a response habit mediated by the striatum is acquired, and it predominates over the hippocampal place strategy. Nevertheless, the place memory can be "uncovered" by inactivating the striatum and suppressing the turning response strategy. These results suggested that there are distinct types of memory that guide place and response strategies, that the response strategy tends to be acquired more slowly than place memory, and that the response strategy is supported by the striatum.More recent research has suggested that the memory supported by the striatum is not necessarily acquired slowly. For example, one study that recorded from neurons in the striatum and prefrontal cortex in monkeys found that the striatal neurons led prefrontal neurons in tracking the reversal of action-outcome contingencies Research with human participants has also indicated that the striatal system may play a critical role in memory even for more complex forms of stimulusresponse learning. For example, Subsequent to training on the weather prediction task, these subjects were given a set of multiple-choice questions about the nature of the task and the kinds of stimulus materials they had encountered. Normal subjects and patients with Parkinson's disease performed very well in recalling the task events. In contrast, the amnesic patients were severely impaired. Thus this example of probabilistic classifi cation learning was disrupted by striatal damage, whereas declarative memory for the learning events was impaired by hippocampal or diencephalic damage.The dorsal striatum supports learning that accrues over repeated trials and supports examples of stimulus-response, habit-like learning. However, the dorsal striatum also supports memory that goes beyond simple stimulus-response learning and includes probabilistic classifi cation learning as well as examples in which subjects learn about reversals of outcomes of particular actions.The cerebellum consists of the cerebellar cortex, which has been divided into lobes and further into lobules, and several deep cerebellar nuclei (see Chapter 32 for more detailed anatomy). The cerebellum receives direct input from the spinal cord and brain stem as well as indirect input from a variety of sensory and motor areas in the cerebral cortex via pontine nuclei in the brain stem. The cerebellum projects directly to the spinal cord, brain stem, hypothalamus, and thalamus, and the thalamic targets in turn project to various motor and nonmotor areas in the cortex, particularly in the frontal lobes The cerebellum has long been associated with aspects of motor learning. For example, the cerebellum supports specifi c sensory-to-motor adaptations and adjustments of refl exes, such as changing the force that one exerts to compensate for a new load or acquiring conditioned refl exes that involve associating novel motor responses to a new stimulus. More recently, the cerebellum also has been associated with nonmotor learning and other examples of cognition and behavior. Based on the idea that the modular circuitry of the cerebellum offers a generalized capacity for processing of specifi c inputs, the present section focuses on one example of cerebellar-dependent learning as a framework for highlighting the role of the cerebellum in memory.Eyeblink classical conditioning has been used frequently as a model of cerebellum-dependent learning, and is perhaps the best understood form of associative memory in vertebrates. In this paradigm, experimental animals (typically rabbits due to their tolerance for physical restraint) are placed in restraining chambersIn this game you are a weather forecaster. You will learn how to predict rain or shine using a deck of four cards.Copyright © 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.FIGURE 50.12 Weather prediction task. View of the computer screen presented to subjects showing all four stimulus cards and the "sun" or "rain" response choices. From where a well-controlled tone or light is presented as the conditioning stimulus (the CS). In classic "delay" conditioning protocol, the CS lasts 250-1000 ms and coterminates with an air puff or mild electrical shock to the eye (the unconditioned stimulus or US) that produces a refl exive, unconditioned eyeblink (the UR). After many pairings of CS and US, the animal begins to produce the eyeblink after onset of the CS and prior to presentation of the US. With further training, the conditioned response (CR) occurs earlier, and its timing becomes optimized so as to be maximal at the US onset. Amazingly enough, rabbits with no cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, limbic system, thalamus, or hypothalamus showed normal retention of the conditioned eyeblink response The essential cerebellar and brain stem circuitry that supports eyeblink conditioning has been carefully delineated by results from other studies that addressed candidate regions upstream from the interpositus nucleus, point to areas in the interpositus nucleus as an essential locus of plasticity in this form of motor learning. Additional studies have indicated that the cerebellar cortex is important for modulating the learning, such as by infl uencing the timing of the conditioned response to ensure that it is adaptive. As in animals, damage to the cerebellum in humans also retards the classically conditioned eyeblink refl ex.Eyeblink classical conditioning is one example of learning that depends on the cerebellum. Other frequently studied examples include adaptations of the vestibulo-ocular refl ex and coordinated motor skill learning. The circuitry essential for eyeblink conditioning has been identifi ed and provides an experimentally tractable opportunity to investigate what may be generalized learning processes supported by the cerebellum. These processes may contribute generally to motor refl ex learning or even more generally to mental processing involved in precise timing.The amygdala is a collection of anatomically and functionally heterogeneous nuclei The amygdala contributes to emotion in several ways, including mediating emotional infl uences on attention and perception and regulating emotional responses Much of the research directed toward understanding the role of the amygdala in acquiring emotional dispositions to stimuli has focused on the circuitry that supports acquisition of fearful responses to simple auditory or visual stimuli This basic procedure has been adapted for use with human participants, and one study that included patients with damage to the amygdala or hippocampus helped to distinguish the type of memory supported by these two structures Memories of emotionally arousing events are often more vivid, more accurate, and longer lasting than memories of more neutral events. Indeed, it is adaptive for organisms to remember important events better than trivial events. Thus, it also makes sense that the brain should have evolved mechanisms for storing information in accordance with how much the information is worth remembering. Evidence from a large number of studies in experimental animals has indicated that the amygdala, in particular the BLA, mediates this memory enhancing effect Emotionally arousing events result in the release of epinephrine and glucocorticoids by the adrenal glands, which in turn result in the release of norepinephrine in the amygdala The amygdala has been strongly implicated in the enhancement of memory for emotional material in humans as well as in experimental animals. In one study, a patient with damage to the amygdala was tested for memory of an emotional story along with a group of healthy individuals The amygdala is well situated anatomically to attach emotional (positive and negative) dispositions to a broad range of stimuli and to mediate the acquisition of such dispositions in the absence of conscious recollection of the circumstances of the emotional experience. In addition, components of the amygdala also mediate the modulation of memory storage during and after emotional events. Memory-modulation mechanisms are an effi cient, evolutionarily adaptive method of ensuring that the strength of a memory tends to be proportional to its importance.As discussed in Chapter 2, the posterior half of the cerebral cortex contains many functionally distinct areas that are organized into hierarchies of serial and parallel processing for each sensory modality. Additionally, there are cortical areas where information from different modalities converges (so-called "association" areas) in the parietal and temporal lobes. The anterior cerebral cortex contains a similar hierarchy of motor areas, as well as association areas in the prefrontal cortex involved with motor planning, higher order cognition, and working memory Some of the examples provided so far, such as standard eyeblink classical conditioning, illustrate that some simple forms of learning can circumvent the cerebral cortex. Although simplifi ed learning paradigms are indispensable as precise instruments to dissect local circuitry, these examples should not overshadow the fact that the global circuitry of each memory system discussed so far includes the cerebral cortex. The cerebral cortex provides access to incoming information as well as output routes to infl uence behavior, access that is important for even the cerebellum. Yet plasticity in the cerebral cortex also directly supports types of memory that do not require components of the other memory systems. For each area of the cortex, the modifi cation of its information processing circuitry through alterations in synaptic connectivity and membrane excitability underlies its direct participation in memory. These alterations can be dramatic, such as in examples of experience-dependent reorganization that occurs in perceptual learning, but can also be more subtle, such as in the phenomenon of repetition priming.Specifi c training experiences can result in the modifi cation of specifi c parts of the cortex. For example, in one study, monkeys were trained over a period of several weeks to discriminate small frequency differences in tone stimuli. In subsequent recordings, increases were observed in the size of the auditory cortex representation of the task-relevant frequencies and the sharpness of tuning to these frequencies Functional imaging studies in humans have revealed that perceptual learning can occur for stimuli that are more complex than simple tones, yet similar to the studies in guinea pigs with tones, these studies have also suggested that the cortical area important for perceiving the stimuli is also an important area of plasticity. For example, in one study participants were scanned while viewing pictures of nonsense objects both before and after performing a perceptual discrimination task that included half of the objects Thus, it appears that many of the areas in the cerebral cortex that are specialized for specifi c perceptual or information processing functions-from areas involved in perceiving simple tones to areas involved in perceiving complex objects-are capable of supporting perceptual learning for those stimuli.Another example of memory thought to be supported directly by the cerebral cortex is the phenomenon known as repetition priming (or priming). Priming involves initial presentation of a list of words, pictures of objects, or nonverbal materials and then subsequent reexposure to fragments or very brief presentation of whole items. For example, in one version of priming, words are fl ashed on a screen so briefl y that many of the words are unreadable. The measure of priming is the increased likelihood of identifying previously viewed words as compared to words not encountered recently, and the benefi t of repetition has been found to be independent of the ability to recognize which words had been read initially. Studies with braindamaged patients suggest that priming depends on cortical areas involved in initially processing the stimuli. In one study, the amnesic patient H.M. and a patient with a large lesion in the right visual cortex attempted to read new and repeated words fl ashed on a computer screen Studies in both animals and humans show that the cerebral cortex is highly plastic in that its representations can be altered after experience. Distinct cortical areas are reorganized by specifi c training experiences to meet demands for specifi c types of perceptual representation and memory. Also, modality-relevant cortical circuits are able to support the priming of perceptual representations.The discussion of memory systems so far has focused on dissociations between systems in illustrating the unique contributions of the central structure in each system. However, behavior is a product of the entire nervous system and typically is guided by contributions of more than one form of memory. For example, training in a sport normally results in declarative memory of instructions from one's coach but also leads to motor skill learning from repetitive practice. The following section considers emerging data regarding how the memory systems discussed so far might collaborate, compete, or operate in parallel and illustrates some progress in understanding how the distribution of memory throughout the brain ordinarily contributes to our day-to-day activities.One example of a direct collaboration between two memory systems is the infl uence of the amygdala on hippocampus-dependent memory for emotion-inducing material. The section earlier in the chapter on the amygdala discussed how emotional arousal leads to the amygdala engaging in modulation of declarative memory, such that stimuli that elicit either positive or negative emotional responses tend to be remembered better than neutral stimuli. This process is thought to result from amygdalar projections modulating synaptic plasticity either in the hippocampus and parahippocampal region or in cortical areas fundamental to the hippocampal memory system. It has been suggested that the amygdala also modulates other memory systems, such as the striatal memory system, and that the amygdala may play a generalized role in memory modulation for emotion inducing stimuli in addition to its role in attaching positive or negative dispositions to stimuli Another example comes from an indirect collaboration between two very dissimilar memory systems, the hippocampal memory system and the cerebellar memory system. The section earlier in the chapter on the cerebellum detailed that the essential circuitry for standard eyeblink classical conditioning involved no forebrain structures and instead centered on deep cerebellar nuclei. Yet the situation changes if the parameters for standard eyeblink classical conditioning, referred to as delay eyeblink conditioning, are altered slightly such that the tone that normally overlaps with the airpuff is moved earlier in time such that it terminates as little as a half second prior to the onset of the airpuff, a version called trace conditioning In other examples, memory systems may operate in parallel or may even compete for control of behavior. For example, the previously discussed studies contrasting the role of the striatum and hippocampus in supporting "response" learning and "place" learning, respectively, illustrate how the memory supported by different brain systems can be at odds with each other. Yet in the example of practicing a sport, the hippocampus-dependent memory for a coach's instructions and the striatal "response" learning would likely support a common behavior. In these instances, it is thought that the striatum and hippocampus contribute to behavior in parallel rather than directly interacting. One can start to get a sense of the often collaborative spirit of brain when one further considers that the emotional arousal that often accompanies athletic competition would likely engage amygdalar modulation of both the hippocampal memory system and the striatal memory systems.Several brain systems support distinct forms of memory characterized by unique operating features and ways in which memory is expressed. The hippocampus supports rapidly acquired memory that is experienced as conscious recollection and that can be expressed fl exibly. The striatum supports gradual acquisition of habits. The cerebellum supports learning related to timing and motor refl exes. The amygdala supports acquisition of emotional dispositions toward stimuli and also mediates the role of emotion arousal in modulating other forms of memory. The cerebral cortex participates in each of these types of memory, and mediates perceptual learning and the phenomenon of priming. These systems also often operate in concert to support the various ways that behavior and mental life can be modifi ed by experience.This chapter discusses the nature of language and the relationship of language to the brain. It begins with a discussion of animal communication, from which human language evolved and which provides a guide to the basic neural elements and processes that underlie our own system of communication. The next section of the chapter provides a brief summary of what human language is and how it is processed. The third section looks at how human language is related to the brain, relying on studies of patients with various types of neurological diseases and on brain imaging in normal subjects.The ultimate goal of most animal communication, like that of behavior in general, is reproduction. Thus, signals that indicate the sender's species, gender, and degree of reproductive readiness account for the vast majority of natural communication. These are the messages being broadcast by chirping crickets, fl ashing fi refl ies, pheromone-releasing moths, and singing birds. Frequently, the mate-attraction call also is used to warn off potential rivals; for example, bird and cricket songs also are used to identify the boundaries of territories or personal space. Differences in signal quality are the usual basis of mate choice in species for which some degree of discrimination is evident. This competition for the attention of members of the opposite sex has led to the development of more conspicuous signals and, in many cases, to the evolution of displays, signaling morphology (i.e., sounds vs. shapes vs. color vs. movement vs. odors), and messages that go far beyond the basic needs of species and sexual identifi cation Most animals are solitary except when mating; they abandon their eggs or larvae before the offspring are born. However, a number of species engage in some degree of parental care. For them, signals between parent and offspring are often very important. Most birds, for instance, have about two dozen innate calls that communicate mundane messages such as the need to eat, defecate, take cover, and so on. In cases in which both parents tend the young-the usual circumstance in birds, for instance-additional signals are required to agree on a nest site, synchronize brooding shifts, and guard the nestlings. Most primates also come equipped with two to three dozen innate signals.The minority of species that are highly social have the most elaborate communication systems of all. They need messages for a variety of elements of social coordination, including, in many cases, group hunting or foraging, defense, and working out of a social hierarchy.Attracting a mate is vital to the survival of an individual's genes. To ensure species specifi city in mating, most organisms rely on more than one cue to identify a sexual partner. (Exceptions include some of the species that rely on pheromones.) Thus, multiple signals are sent, and a choice must be made between sending simultaneous messages and sending sequential messages (or a combination of the two). The sequential strategy has the advantage that the individual signals must be correct and the order must be appropriate. A female stickleback, for instance, requires the male to have a red ventral stripe, perform a zig-zag dance, poke his nose in a nest, and then vibrate her abdomen; the odds of this concatenation of signals occurring together in this order by chance are remote. A human sentence in a word-order language like English operates roughly in this way. However, sequential signaling is time-consuming. A faster strategy is to provide all the cues in parallel, an approach that accepts the larger chance that these cues can occur together by chance. For example, when a parent herring gull waves its bill in front of chicks to see if they need to be fed, the young simultaneously see a vertical beak, a red spot, and a horizontal motion, each of which is a discrete cue that combine in the mind of the chick to elicit pecking.Nearly all animal communication is innate: the sender produces the appropriate signal in the correct context even without any opportunity for learning, and it can be recognized for what it is by equally naive conspecifi cs. The basis of innate recognition appears to lie with feature detectors in the nervous systems-the inborn circuits that automatically isolate iconic visual or acoustic elements A common misapprehension is that complex behaviors must be learned. In fact, complex behavior in relatively short-lived species is usually innate, refl ecting the reality that intricate activities are very diffi cult to learn and may require more time and risk of errors than an animal can afford In terms of its ability to communicate information, the most complex system of nonhuman communication known at present is the dance of honey bees In terms of information content, a honey bee dance is second (albeit a very distant second) only to human speech, and so far as is known is far richer than the language of any primate. However the dance language suffers from at least two limitations: It is a closed system-there seems to be no way to introduce new conventions to deal with novel needs. It is also graded; instead of discrete signals for different directions or distances, single components are varied over a range of values (angles and durations). The less complex but more fl exible systems of birds and primates are more likely to illustrate the evolutionary precursors of speech.Some birds have innate songs. In these species, individuals raised in isolation produce songs that are indistinguishable from their socially reared peers and respond to calls appropriately without prior experience. Chickens, doves, gulls, and ducks are familiar examples. Most songbirds, however, illustrate a different pattern-one that shows how potent a combination instinct and innately directed learning can be. Isolated chicks sing a schematic form of the species song, but the richness of a normal song is absent. Adult conspecifi cs can recognize innate songs as coming from members of their species, but in general these impoverished vocalizations produce lower levels of response. Typically, there is a sensitive period during which exposure to song must occur if it is going to have any impact Given a range of possible song models during isolated rearing, a chick selects an example from its own species and memorizes it. If it hears only songs of other species, the mature song is the unmodifi ed innate song ( Practice is essential in the normal development of birdsong, and part of this practice occurs in a babbling phase known as subsong, which begins at a species-typical age. A bird deafened after its sensitive period, but before it begins producing notes in preparation for singing (subsong), is unable to produce even an innate song There is some fl exibility in song development. For example, when the chick has heard two very different specimens of its own species' song, it will often incorporate elements from each. Similarly, when the chick has been exposed to the sight of a singing conspecifi c and simultaneously the sound of a heterospecifi c song, it may pick out elements of the abnormal song and adapt them as best it can into its own species-specifi c organization. .1 Birdsong development in most species is characterized by a sensitive period during which a song of the species must be heard. Later, during subsong, the bird practices making notes and assembles them into the correct order and pattern (A). Birds not allowed to hear their species' song sing a schematic version of the song (B and C); birds deafened before subsong cannot sing (D).Birdsong, therefore, depends on two processes that involve an interaction between innate capacities and learning: imprinting the song in memory and then learning to perform it. This system is fl exible, but only within clear limits.Primates are the species with the closest evolutionary links to humans, and therefore the communication systems found in these animals are important to study for clues regarding the neural basis of human language.Vervets, a species of monkey, provide a good case study. Vervets, like all social primates, have a large repertoire of innate calls used for social communication. Among these approximately three dozen signals are four alarm calls The development of calling is revealing. Young vervets appear to understand the class of animals each call refers to, but not the particular species that are dangerous. Thus, infants will give the eagle call to harmless vultures, storks, and even falling leaves, but not to snakes or leopards. Consequently, adults generally respond to the alarm calls of infants with a casual look around, followed by their own alarm if there is a genuine danger. Juveniles make fewer mistakes, and adult errors are confi ned to calls produced when the potential threat is so far away that human observers require binoculars to identify the species. In short, young vervets seem to learn the details of how to apply an innate categorical vocabulary.Nonhuman primates have virtually no voluntary control over respiration, the vocal tract, or vocalization, so this modality is not available for producing a large number of differentiated signals. Other modalities of communication, such as gesture, however, are also used for relatively restricted purposes, mostly related to items of immediate biological importance and social hierarchy. Recent detailed studies of gesture use in captive chimpanzees indicate that the meaning of particular gestures differ from one group to another.Researchers have attempted to teach chimpanzees to use a variety of communicative systems that bypass their vocal limitations, such as sign language and manipulation of object tokens, in an effort to determine to what extent these naturally occurring communication systems can be augmented. If anything, this work emphasizes the ways in which nonhuman primates are not capable of full human language. There are dramatic differences between trained chimpanzees and humans in terms of vocabulary size (chimps never get beyond what a 2-year-old can do), conceptual capacities, complex grammar, and so on, despite the fact that chimps have remarkable skills at social cognition.The neural mechanisms that underlie animal communication may give clues as to those that allow for human language. These systems of course differ in different phyla and species. This section briefl y reviews aspects of the neural basis for birdsong and primate communication. It would be of great interest to report on the neural basis for the dance of the bees, but nothing is known about this subject.Birdsong appears to be produced by a small number of nuclei (collections of nerve cells). In the canary, four important nuclei are involved: HVc, RA, DM, and nXIIts. Lesions in any of these nuclei destroy or seriously impair song production. These nuclei also respond when song is presented, and some neurons in some nuclei in some species (e.g., neurons in nXIIts in the zebra fi nch and the white-crowned sparrow) respond specifi cally to particular aspects of song. This indicates an overlap in the neural mechanisms involved in song perception and production, a feature that may carry over to humans as well.Birdsong is produced by a structure between the trachea and the bronchi called the syrinx. There is one syrinx on each side of the trachea. In some species, song is entirely, or mainly, produced by one of these two structures; in other species, both syrinxes participate in song, with each producing different parts of the song. Each syrinx is controlled by structures in its corresponding side of the brain and, when one syrinx is responsible for song, these structures are larger on that side. The perceptual system is also duplicated on both sides of the brain, and, in some species, the two sides of the brain respond to different aspects of song.In species in which only male birds sing (most species), song nuclei are much larger in males than in females ("sexual dimorphism"). This is not true in those species in which males and females perform duets. In general, there is a correlation between song nucleus size and song complexity in individual birds. Furthermore, song nuclei grow by a factor of almost 100% during the spring mating season (when birds sing) compared to the fall and winter (when they do not).Changes in the size of song nuclei are related to testosterone production (they can be induced in females by testosterone injection in some circumstances) and by other factors usually related to daylength-part of the birds' innate calendar. They are due to many changes in nerve cells: increase in the number of dendrites, increase in cell size, and, most interestingly, increase in the number of cells. Studies using labeled thymidine, which is taken up by dividing DNA, have shown neurogenesis in neurons in the HVc nucleus in relationship to periods of increased song, indicating that new nerve cells are formed. These neurons project to the RA nucleus, strongly suggesting that they play a role in song.The neural basis for primate vocalizations is beginning to be charted. Unlike humans, vocalizations in primates do not appear to begin in a lateral cortical region but rather in the medial portion of the brain (the cingulate), a region involved in connecting basic instinctual to more advanced cognitive functions. Actual motor planning appears to involve mainly brain stem nuclei. On the perception side, there are neurons in the auditory cortex of some species of macaque monkeys that selectively respond to conspecifi c calls. These regions show some degree of functional asymmetry in some species, with responses from cells in the left hemisphere and not the right.It is dangerous to infer too much about human language, or about how the human brain may support language, from studies of species that are very distant, such as birds. However, these species provide evidence for the possibility of certain aspects of language and its neural basis that could have developed several times in evolution or that could date to a distant common ancestor.At a behavioral level, human speech and language could have developed from the repertoire of two to three dozen innate calls that are typical of birds and primates. In that case, we would expect to fi nd that language contains elements that are innately recognized and that may be distinguished by the sorts of acoustic features that provide the basis for the innate discrimination of sign stimuli in other species. In fact, babies have an innate ability to discriminate a small number of sounds found in human languages, which function as acoustic sign stimuli. The evolution of human speech could also have retained the sorts of sensitive periods and innate learning biases so evident in song birds and vervet monkeys. In this case, we might expect to see a species-typical babbling phase, and perhaps a sensitive period for easy learning of new languages. If the evolution of speech and language preserves the use of preexisting (innate) forms, we might expect there to be innate aspects of human language, which would presumably be found in all languages and which might surface in situations where we see a "default grammar," not unlike the unlearned and impoverished songs of birds reared in isolation. Creoles potentially exemplify such cases. Creoles are languages developed by the children of people speaking different languages who are drawn together and communicate with very simple pidgin. They have a number of features not present in the languages spoken by the parents of the children who spoke the pidgin, which have been taken to be related to innately specifi ed features of language From the neurological perspective, several features of the neural organization for communication systems appear to be found in humans in a way that is relevant to language. These features are the fact that there are specialized neural nuclei for song production; that the neural basis for song production is often asymmetric, with one hemisphere producing most of song or the two hemispheres producing different aspects of song; that production and perception of song make use of same structures to some degree; and that there is a relationship of size to function. However, other important features of the neurobiology of birdsong, such as the neurogenesis that is important in the seasonal changes in song production, are not known to play a role in human speech and language. As for primates, the neural system responsible for call production is quite different from that in humans, being based in the cortex that is transitional from limbic to association regions (refl ecting the limited semantic content and immediate biological relevance of most calls). Asymmetries in the neural basis for call perception, and the existence of neurons in the auditory association cortex that selectively respond to conspecifi c calls, may be quite direct evolutionary precursors of the human neural substrate for language. One is what messages human language can convey. As we have seen, most animal communication systems serve the purposes of identifying members of a species. These systems do sometimes designate items of immediate biological signifi cance, such as designation of predators by monkeys or food sources by bees. Human language differs from these systems with respect to the number of items that can be designated and the relationship of these items to present biological necessity. Human language allows us to designate an infi nitely large number of items, actions, and properties of items and actions, and to do so with respect to items that are not immediately biologically compelling.Human language also allows us to relate items, actions, and properties to one another. This propositional level of semantic content is beyond the scope of any known animal communication system. At a yet higher level, human language allows us to express relationships between events and states of affairs in the world, such as temporal order and causation. Again, this level of meaning is far beyond anything available to other species as far as we know. It refl ects the human ability to conceive of an enormous number of concepts and to relate them to one another.Language expresses these different semantic values with different types of representations: words, words made from other words, sentences, and discourse. Each of these "levels" of linguistic representation consists of specifi c forms that are related to specifi c aspects of meaning. The forms at each level are intricately structured, and there are an infi nite number of different structures that can be built at each level of the system.Simple words are defi ned and distinguished from each other primarily by their phonemes. A phoneme is a single distinct sound that contrasts with another ( At the semantic level, put in very simple terms, words designate concrete objects, abstract concepts, actions, properties, and logical connectives. Many philosophers and psychologists, and most neurologists who have considered the subject, have thought that the meaning of a word consists of a set of features of objects and actions that are associated with the word's sound through one's experience. However, the meaning of a word also includes unobserved properties of the item that the word designates, such as our knowledge that cats can swim even if we have never observed one swimming. This knowledge may be based on inductive generalizations, logical inferences, or innate concepts regarding the structure of items. The word-formation level of language allows words to be formed from other words. Language uses many devices to accomplish this-compounding, affi xation, "pa" "ta" "ka""ba" "da" "ga""ma" "na" "nga" FIGURE 51.2 Schema of sound spectrographs of nine phonemes followed by a short "a" sound. The sound bands are called "formants." The fi rst (bottom) two formants are independent; the third is a harmonic of the second.agglutination, and others. English affi xation provides a useful illustration. There are two main types of affi xes in English: infl ection and derivation. Infl ection is related to the syntactic structure of a sentence, as in agreement between subjects and objects (I see; he sees). English is relatively poor in overt infl ectional features; languages such as Dutch and German have more complete and complex agreement systems that affect adjective-noun agreement, verb infl ections, and the case markers on nouns. Derivational processes are those that create new syntactic categories of words (e.g., destroy-destruction; happy-happiness). Derivation allows the meaning associated with a simple lexical item to be used as a different syntactic category without coining a large number of new lexical forms that would have to be learned.The sentential level of language consists of syntactic structures At the sentence level the set of semantic values that language can express expands greatly Sentences are a crucial level of the language code because the propositions they express make assertions about the world. These assertions can be added to an individual's knowledge of the world (i.e., they can add to semantic memory). Because they can be true or false (something that is not possible with words), they can be entered into logical systems. They are likely critical in certain aspects of thinking, such as decision making and planning actions.The propositional meanings conveyed by sentences are entered into higher order structures that constitute the discourse level of linguistic structure. Discourse includes information about the general topic under discussion, the focus of a speaker's attention, the novelty of the information in a given sentence, the temporal order of events, causation, and so on. Discourse also conveys information about the intentions of a speaker and a listener and the current attentional foci. The structure of discourse involves establishing relationships between items and propositions. Some part of this structure is derived from the form in which propositions are expressed. In a sequence of sentences such as John and Henry went to Bill's last night. They were really glad they did. The raved about the dessert the whole next day.The reader will take "they" as referring to John and Henry, partly because "John and Henry" and "they" are the subjects of successive sentences. However, part of the information conveyed at the discourse level depends upon associations and inferences that listeners make. For instance, in the same passage, the reader will likely infer that John and Henry ate dinner at Bill's-something not stated in the passage but that makes the sentences in the passage coherent.Current models of language processing subdivide functions such as reading, speaking, auditory comprehension, and writing into many different, semiindependent components, which are sometimes called "modules" or "processors." These components can be further divided into variable numbers of highly specialized operations, such as those involved in mapping features of the acoustic signal onto phonemes or in constructing syntactic structures from words. Each operation accepts only particular types of representations as input and produces only specifi c types of representations as output.Models of language processing often are expressed as fl ow diagrams (or "functional architectures") that indicate the sequence of operations of the different components that perform a language-related task. Beyond specifying the fl ow of information through the language processing system, researchers have begun to understand the operating characteristics of its components. Several important features of language processing operations have been demonstrated in experimental laboratories or in studies of patients.1. They are specialized for language. For instance, recognition of phonemes is probably accomplished by mechanisms that separate very early in the processing stream from those that recognize other auditory stimuli. 2. They are obligatorily activated when their inputs are presented to them. For instance, if we attend to a sound that happens to be the word "elephant," we must hear and understand that word; we cannot hear this sound as just a noise. 3. They generally operate unconsciously. We usually have the subjective impression that we are extracting another person's meaning and producing linguistic forms without being aware of the details of the sounds of words, sentence structure, and so on. 4. They operate quickly and accurately. For instance, it has been estimated on the basis of many different psycholinguistic experimental techniques that spoken words usually are recognized less than 125 ms after their onset-that is, while they are still being uttered. The speed of the language processing system as a whole occurs because of the speed of each of its components, but also is achieved because of the massively parallel functional architecture of the system, which leads to many components of the system being simultaneously active. 5. They require processing resources. Although we do not appreciate it consciously, language processing demands some effort. It is unclear whether there are separate pools of processing resources for each language processing component or for language processing as a whole or whether language processing can "borrow" resources from other systems if it needs to.We have discussed language processing in the auditory-oral modality. However, humans who are deaf can develop language in the visual and gestural modalities, and the structures of these language are essentially the same as those of spoken language, once allowances are made for the fact that they are signed instead of spoken. Languages can also be represented orthographically. Orthographies range from alphabetical scripts such as English, to syllabic, consonantal, and ideographic orthographies. Orthography is not acquired in the way spoken and signed language is; reading and writing require instruction to master. Many of the features of spoken language processing we have reviewed apply to the processing of spoken, written, and signed language as well. We cannot review 51. LANGUAGE AND COMMUNICATION VII. BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE these modalities of language use here; for an introduction to signed language and its neurology, see The operations of the language processing system are regulated by a variety of control mechanisms. These control mechanisms include both ones internal to the language processor itself and those that are involved in other aspects of cognition. The fi rst categorylanguage-internal control mechanisms-consists of a large number of operations that schedule psycholinguistic operations on the basis of the ongoing nature of a given psycholinguistic task. The second category of control mechanisms-those that are related to cognitive processing outside the language system-determine what combinations of processors become active in order to accomplish different tasks such as reading, repeating what one has heard, and taking notes on a lecture.Functional communication involving the language code occurs when people use these processors to inform others, to ask for information, to get things done, and so on. The use of language is thus one type of intentional action. There are conventions (or rules) that regulate the use of language for these purposes. However, it is a mistake to think that language is only used, or even mainly used, for functional communication and that language is, at its core, a communication system. The heart of human language is a system of representations relating forms to meaning. In fact, as Chomsky has pointed out, far and away the most common use of language is not interpersonal communication at all, but talking to oneself.By some counts, there are over 6500 languages in the world. These languages differ in many ways from one another: they have different vocabularies, use different sounds, and have different ways of forming words and different syntactic rules. However, beyond these surface level differences, there are features that are common to all human language. For instance, the sound systems of all human languages consist of alternations of consonants and vowels; no language forms different words by varying features of sound such as its loudness or whether a word is whispered. These "linguistic universals" form a framework within which the features of individual languages occur.Linguistic universals can arise because of universal features of motor or sensory systems or, possibly, because of constraints on cognitive computational capacities. They may also arise because language itself is constrained to have certain features. Chomsky's work in the area of syntax is the best known and most controversial example of analyses along these lines. Chomsky and his colleagues and students have argued that very abstract features of syntax are common to all languages. There have been numerous suggestions as to what these features are; one recent proposal is that they include the ability to generate an infi nite number of expressions from a fi nite set of elements The issues of how abstract linguistic representations are and what universal properties of language exist are bound up with two major issues-how language is acquired and how language evolved-that are in turn relevant to the neural basis for language. Chomsky's view is that language acquisition consists of fi xing the parameters in an innate language template that correspond to the constraints on possible forms of human language that are present in the language a child is exposed to. Models of language that see language structures as much less abstract make very different claims about the nature of innate features of language and the balance between innate knowledge and learning in the development of language abilities (e.g., The same disagreements affect ideas about how language evolved. In Chomsky's model, a critical neural development is the emergence of structures and processes in the brain that support recursive properties of language in the human brain. The recent fi nding that starlings can discriminate recursive from nonrecursive sequences of notes One well-known model of this sort that has a neural basis has been developed by There are very limited empirical data regarding the genetic basis for human language development. However, the defi cits in affected family members are not specifi c to syntax or word formation, and, as Lieberman argues, it is more likely that this gene codes for neuronal features of subcortical gray nuclei, in particular the basal ganglia and, to a lesser extent, the cerebellum that make for more elaborate and effi cient control of sequencing abilities than for cortical structures that represent and process language per se.Human language depends on the integrity of the unimodal and multimodal association cortex in the lateral portion of both cerebral hemispheres. This cortex surrounds the sylvian fi ssure and runs from the pars triangularis and opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus (Brodmann's areas (BA) 45, 44: Broca's area) through the angular and supramarginal gyri (BA 39 and 40) into the superior temporal gyrus (BA22: Wernicke's area) The evidence that language involves these cortical regions originally was derived from defi cit-lesion correlations. Patients with lesions in parts of this cortex have been described who have had long-lasting impairments of language ("aphasia"). Disorders affecting language processing after perisylvian lesions have been described in many different types of disease, in all languages that have been studied, in patients of all ages and both sexes, and in both fi rst and subsequent tongues, indicating that this cortical region is involved in language processing independent of these factors. Functional neuroimaging studies have documented increases in regional cerebral blood fl ow (rCBF) using PET or blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal using fMRI in tasks associated with language processing in this region. Event-related potentials whose sources are likely to be in this region have been described in relationship to a variety of language processing operations. Stimulation of this cortex by direct application of electrical current during neurosurgical procedures interrupts language processing. These data all converge on the conclusion that language processing is carried out in the perisylvian cortex.Regions outside the perisylvian association cortex also appear to support language processing. Working outward from the perisylvian region, evidence shows that the modality of language use affects the location of the neural tissue that supports language, with written language involving the cortex closer to the visual areas of the brain and sign language involving brain regions closer to those involved in movements of the hands than movements of the oral cavity. Some ERP components related to processing improbable or ill-formed language are maximal over high parietal and central scalp electrodes, suggesting that these regions may be involved in language processing. Both lesion studies in stroke patients and functional neuroimaging studies suggest that the inferior and anterior temporal lobe is involved in representing the meanings of nouns. Activation studies also implicate the precentral gyrus and premotor cortex in word meaning. Injury to the supplementary motor cortex along the medial surface of the frontal lobe can lead to speech initiation disturbances; this region may be important in activating the language processing system, at least in production tasks. Activation studies have shown increased rCBF and BOLD signal in the cingulate gyrus in association with many language tasks. This activation, however, appears to be nonspecifi c, as it occurs in many other, nonlinguistic, tasks as well. It has been suggested that it is due to increased arousal and deployment of attention associated with more complex tasks.Subcortical structures may also be involved in language processing. Several studies report aphasic disturbances following strokes in deep gray matter nuclei (the caudate, putamen, and parts of the thalamus). It has been suggested that subcortical structures involved in laying down procedural memories for motor functions-in particular, the basal ganglia-are involved in "rule-based" processing in language, such as regular aspects of word formation, as opposed to the longterm maintenance of information in memory, as occurs with simple words and irregularly formed words. The thalamus may play a role in processing the meanings of words. In general, subcortical lesions cause language impairments when the overlying cortex is abnormal (often the abnormality can be seen only with metabolic scanning techniques), and the degree of language impairment is better correlated with measures of cortical than subcortical hypometabolism. It may be that subcortical structures serve to activate a cortically based language processing system but do not themselves process language.The cerebellum also has increased its rCBF in some activation studies involving both language and other cognitive functions. This may be a result of the role of this part of the brain in processes involved in timing and temporal ordering of events, or in its being directly involved in language and other cognitive functions.In summary, a large number of brain regions are involved in representing and processing language. Ultimately, they all interact with one another as well as with other brain areas involved in using the products of language processing to accomplish tasks. In this sense, all these regions are part of a "neural system," but this does not imply that every part of this entire system is responsible for computing specifi c linguistic representations. The most important part of the neural system involved in language is the dominant (usually left-sided) perisylvian cortex.Most language processing goes on in one hemisphere, called the "dominant" hemisphere. Which hemisphere is dominant shows considerable individual differences and bears a systematic relationship to handedness. In about 98% of right-handed individuals, the left hemisphere is dominant. The extent to which left hemisphere lesions cause language disorders is infl uenced by the degree to which an individual is right-handed and by the number of nonright-handers in his or her family. About 60 to 65% of nonrighthanded individuals are left-hemisphere dominant; about 15 to 20% are right-hemisphere dominant; and the remainder appear to use both hemispheres for lan-guage processing. The relationship of dominance for language to handedness suggests a common determination of both, probably in large part genetic.The neural basis for lateralization was fi rst suggested by Although language was the fi rst function known to be lateralized, and is still the best example of a lateralized function, it is not completely lateralized. Although not as important in language functioning as the dominant hemisphere, the nondominant hemisphere is involved in many language operations. Evidence from the effects of lesions and split brain studies, experiments using presentation of stimuli to one or the other hemisphere in normal subjects, and activation studies all indicates that the nondominant hemisphere understands many words, especially concrete nouns, and suggests that it is involved in other aspects of language processing as well. Some language operations may be carried out primarily in the right hemisphere. The best candidates for these operations are ones that pertain to processing the discourse level of language, interpreting nonliteral language such as metaphors, and appreciating the tone of a discourse; for example, the fact that it is humorous. Some scientists have developed models of the sorts of processing that the right hemisphere carries out. For instance, it has been suggested that the right hemisphere codes information in a more general way compared to the left, representing the overall structure of a stimulus as opposed to its details. This may be true for language as well as for other functions, such as visual perception. This and other suggestions provide the bases for ongoing research programs into the nature of language processing in the right hemisphere.The way the perisylvian cortex is organized to support these functions has been the subject of much investigation. Two general classes of theories of the relationship of parts of the perisylvian association cortex to components of the language processing system have been developed. One is based on "holist" or distributed views of neural function and one on localizationist principles. The basic tenet of holist/distributed theories is that linguistic representations are HUMAN LANGUAGE distributed widely and that language processing components rely on broad areas of the association cortex. Localizationist theories maintain that language processing components are localized in specifi c parts of the cortex. The fi rst author of this chapter has argued that some language operations are localized, but that their localization varies across the population. There is some evidence for holist theories. Lesions throughout the language area have been found in some studies to have similar effects on language functions, consistent with the principle of equipotentiality. There is an effect of lesion size on the overall severity of functional impairments in several language spheres, consistent with the principle of mass action. These results are consistent with a distributed, or holistic, neural basis for linguistic representations and processes. However, they do not necessarily show that these models are correct because they also could result from variability in the localization of language processing components across the population.The functional neuroimaging literature does not support holist models; every study of a language function has yielded neurovascular responses in one area or a small number of areas. However, this may be a result of the way functional neuroimaging data are analyzed: standard analyses are designed to identify small areas in which there are large changes in BOLD signal (relative to the variability of BOLD signal in the entire brain), not large areas in which there are small changes. Thus, if language operations were widely distributed and resulted in small increases in neurophysiological activity throughout the perisylvian cortex, it is not clear that these changes would be detected by present day functional neuroimaging.Holist models appear to apply to individual areas of the brain. Modern "neural net" (connectionist) computer simulations provide a formal basis for holist models of language processing. As noted earlier, these models have been extremely successful in modeling certain aspects of normal language processing and language defi cits. A very reasonable view is that different neural areas support different language functions and that each of these areas works as a whole, as holist models claim. Holism thus may not be wrong; it just needs to be applied on the right scale. As has been said, the brain may be "globally local and locally global."Evidence against any holist model is the fi nding that multiple individual language defi cits arise in patients with small perisylvian lesions, often in complementary functional spheres. For instance, some patients have trouble producing the small grammatical function words of language (such as the, what, is, he), whereas others have trouble producing common nouns. The existence of these two disorders indicates that the tissue involved in producing function words is not involved in producing common nouns in the fi rst set of patients, and vice versa in the second set. Strong evidence against holist models also comes from activation studies that demonstrate vascular responses to particular types of language stimuli in restricted cortical areas. How language is organized at this fi nergrained level in the perisylvian association cortex is an ongoing topic of research.The fi rst localizationist theories emerged from clinical observations in the mid-and late nineteenth century. The pioneers of aphasiology-Paul Broca, Karl Wernicke, John Hughlings Jackson, and other neurologists-described patients with lesions in the left inferior frontal lobe whose speech was hesitant and poorly articulated and other patients with lesions more posteriorly, in the superior temporal lobe, who had disturbances of comprehension and fl uent speech with sound and word substitutions. These correlations led to the theory that language comprehension went on in the unimodal auditory association cortex (Wernicke's area, Brodmann area 22) adjacent to the primary auditory cortex (Heschl's gyrus, Brodmann area 41) and that motor speech planning went on in the unimodal motor association cortex in Broca's area (Brodmann areas 44 and 45) adjacent to the primary motor cortex (Brodmann area 4). These theories incorporated the idea that localization of a language operation depends on the way it is related to sensory and motor processes. According to this view, speech planning goes on in Broca's area because Broca's is imme-diately adjacent to the motor area responsible for movement of the articulators and Wernicke's area is involved in comprehension because it is immediately adjacent to primary auditory cortex.These ideas and models were extended by Norman Geschwind and colleagues in the 1960s and 1970s. However, despite its widespread use, this model has distinct limitations. Although some of the classic aphasic syndromes describe defi cits at the level of word formation and sentence production, the model itself deals only with words, not with other levels of the language code. From a linguistic and psycholinguistic point of view, the syndromes all are composed of many processing defi cits, which are different in different patients with the same syndrome. The correlations between syndromes and lesions are far from perfect. They are found primarily in the chronic stage of recovery from stroke, not in acute or subacute phases of stroke and not in other diseases, and even in chronic strokes a very large number of patients do not fall into the standard categories or their lesions do not occur where the model predicts they will. Indeed, the correlations between syndromes and lesions may refl ect the fact that speech fl uency is a critical dimension along which patients are classifi ed, and nonfl uent aphasias tend to be due to anterior lesions that affect motor structures whereas fl uent aphasias tend to be due to posterior lesions that do not.In the past 20 years or so, a number of researchers have sought to reinterpret the classic syndromes in terms of more specifi c components of the language processing system. For instance, the classic syndrome of conduction aphasia, in which patients have difficulty producing the correct sequences of sounds for words despite being able to produce individual sounds clearly and knowing what the words mean, has been divided into two separate defi cits-one affecting shortterm verbal memory and one affecting speech planning These modern studies of the classic aphasic syndromes have been part of a more radical transition to describing defi cits in aphasic patients in terms of specifi c linguistic representations and psycholinguistic processes. The next sections review studies of location of two language processes-word recognition and comprehension, and syntactic operations-that cover the spectrum of abstractness of linguistic representations.Evidence from normal and impaired human subjects suggests that temporo-spectral acoustic cues to feature identity appear to be integrated in unimodal auditory association cortex lying along the superior temporal sulcus immediately adjacent to the primary auditory koniocortex Based on functional neuroimaging results, activation of the long-term representations of the sound patterns of words is thought to occur in the left superior temporal gyrus. Scott and her colleagues have argued that there is a pathway along this gyrus and the corresponding left superior temporal sulcus such that  ing. H is Heschl's gyrus, the primary auditory cortex. STP is the superior temporal plane, divided into posterior and anterior areas. STG is the superior temporal gyrus. Traditional theories maintain that pSTP and STG are the loci of phonemic processing. word recognition occurs in a region anterior and inferior to primary auditory cortex, and that word meanings are activated further along this pathway in anterior inferior temporal lobe bilaterally As described earlier, traditional neurological models maintained that the meanings of words consist of sets of neural correlates of the physical properties that are associated with a heard word, all converging in the inferior parietal lobe. It is now known that most lesions in the inferior parietal lobe do not affect word meaning and functional neuroimaging studies designed to require word meaning do not tend to activate this region. Evidence is accruing that the associations of words include "retroactivation" of neural patterns back to unimodal motor and sensory association cortex Both defi cits and functional activation studies have suggested that there are unique neural loci for the representation of object categories such as tools (frontal association cortex and middle temporal lobe), animals and foods (inferior temporal lobe and superior temporal sulcus), and faces (fusiform gyrus) (see We shall review the use of syntactic structure to determine sentence meaning in the comprehension process. Defi cits of this ability typically are established by showing that patients can understand sentences with simple syntactic structures (e.g., The boy chased the girl.) and sentences with complex syntactic structures in which the relationships between nouns and verbs can be inferred from a knowledge of real-world events (e.g., The apple the boy ate was red.), but not sentences with complex structures in which the relationships between nouns and verbs depend on a syntactic structure that needs to be constructed (e.g., The boy the girl pushed was tall.). A variety of models have been proposed regarding the neural basis for sentence comprehension, ranging from localization, though distribution to variable localization.A very well-known theory-the trace deletion model Functional neuroimaging studies have led many researchers to articulate models in which one or another aspect of parsing or interpretation is localized in Broca's area, or in portions of this region Human language is a unique representational system that relates aspects of meaning to many types of forms (e.g., phonemes, lexical items, syntax), each with its own complex structure. Animal communication systems are neither as complex nor as powerful as human language. Nonetheless, they have some similarities to language and provide clues as to the neural basis of human language. Some language traits are part of a shared evolutionary ancestry with other species, others represent convergent, independent evolution of analogous processes, and yet others must be unique to our species. Perhaps the most important lessons learned from animal studies are that complex communication systems can be innate, that learning can shape an innately specifi ed range of behavioral possibilities, and that communication systems can rely on specifi c nuclei within the brain and be lateralized. Other features of the neural basis for animal communication systems, such as seasonal variation in the size of birdsong nuclei and the mechanisms that underlie this phenomenon, are not obviously relevant to human language.Defi cit-lesion correlations and neuroimaging studies are beginning to provide data about the neural structures involved in human language. It appears that one area of the brain-the left perisylvian association cortex-is especially important in representing and processing language (although other regions are involved as well), and that, within this area, particular language operations are localized in specifi c regions. The exact details of these localizations are just beginning to be understood, as the modern tools of cognitive neuroscience are applied to this problem.What controls your thoughts? How do you decide what to pay attention to? How do you act appropriately while dining in a restaurant or listening to a lecture? How do you plan and execute errands? How do you manage to pursue long-term goals, like obtaining a college degree, in the face of the many distractions that can knock you "off task"? In short, how does the brain manage to orchestrate the activity of millions of neurons to produce behavior that is willful, coordinated, and extends over time? This is called cognitive control, the ability of our thoughts and actions to rise above mere reactions to the immediate environment and be proactive: to anticipate possible futures and coordinate and direct thought and action to them. It is a hallmark of intelligent behavior.Because cognitive control necessarily involves the coordination of many different brain processes, it no doubt depends on circuits that extend over much of the cerebral cortex. However, one cortical region, the prefrontal cortex (PFC), seems to play a central role. It is the cortical area that reaches the greatest relative size in the human brain and is thus thought to be the neural instantiation of the mental qualities that we think of as "intelligent." Accordingly, the PFC receives converging information from many brain systems processing external and internal information and it is interconnected with motor system structures needed for voluntary action.Here, we discuss anatomical, neuropsychological, and neurophysiological evidence for, and theories of, the role of the PFC in cognitive control. We will begin with a discussion of the characteristics of volitional, or controlled, processes as they can provide predictions about the neural mechanisms likely to underlie them.Behavior varies along a continuum from mindless, automatic behaviors to willful and purposeful (i.e., controlled) behaviors (see These relatively simple, hardwired, cue-response mappings are useful in many situations. Because they can simply be fi red off by the environment, they are quick and can be executed without taxing the limited capacity of our conscious thoughts. But a creature that is only at the mercy of its immediate environment is not well equipped to deal with the ambiguity, and exploit the opportunity, of a complex and dynamic world. Sometimes, the course of action is not obvious because cues are ambiguous (i.e., they activate more than one possible internal representation), or multiple Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition behaviors might be triggered and the one that is optimal for a given situation is at a disadvantage relative to better established (more automatic) alternatives. In these situations, ambiguity needs to be resolved by our internal states and intentions, by knowledge of possible and desired future outcomes (goals) and what means have been successful at achieving them in the past as well as their relative costs and benefi ts. This information is used to activate the same basic sensory, memory, and motor processes that are engaged during automatic behaviors. Only now, they are not triggered by cues from the environment. They are orchestrated in a top-down fashion by our expectations about goals and the means to achieve them. So, this mode of behavior is controlled in the sense that we (our knowledge and intensions) are in charge, not the environment. A tenet of modern studies of behavior is that this knowledge is obtained by learning mechanisms that detect and store associations between cues, internal states, and actions that predict goal attainment (reward) (see The cognitive control system must also have the ability to select which sensory, memory, and motor processes are activated at a given moment. Selection is central because of our very limited capacity to engage in controlled behaviors. This is evident to anyone who has tried to talk on the phone and answer an e-mail at the same time; we can think about only a limited number of things at a time. This is in contrast to our high capacity for automatic processes. Because they can be triggered by the environment, any number of them can be fi red off at once, as long as they do not come into direct confl ict with one another. It makes sense that brain mechanisms for cognitive control would evolve with this capacity limitation. There is the tradeoff between amount of information and depth of analysis; focusing processing on a narrow band of information relevant to a current goal allows a much more elaborate analysis of a situation and available options. This single-mindedness also allows us to stay on track; processing information not relevant to a current goal increases the chance for distraction. In fact, in many views of cognition, control and attention are virtual synonyms. It follows that a neural system for cognitive control must have the infrastructure and mechanisms for selecting goal-relevant, and suppressing goal-irrelevant, processes throughout the cerebral cortex.The cognitive control system must also have a way to deal with the gaps in time that are inevitable with goal-directed behaviors. Information about predicted goals and means must be brought online before the behaviors are executed and maintained until the current task is completed. Also, because goal-directed behaviors typically are extended over time, we often must wait for additional information or for a more opportune time to execute an action. The ability to keep goal-relevant information online and available for processing is called working memory Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the cognitive control system must be highly plastic and fl exible. Virtually all voluntary, goal-directed behaviors are acquired by experience, and given that humans and other primates are capable of rapid learning of new volitional behaviors, the cognitive control system must have an equal capacity for rapid learning. Primates are also remarkably fl exible with their controlled behaviors. One may learn how to navigate a specifi c circumstance, but one can quickly generalize this to new situations, conjoin them with others, and rearrange them to produce novel behaviors. Goal-directed behaviors can also be temporarily interrupted and resumed at ease. One might temporarily divert oneself from wine shopping, for example, to pick up some cheese. By contrast, automatic behaviors are characterized by their rigidity. They are initiated by specifi c trigger events and are "ballistic"; once activated they tend to run off in pretty much the same way every time. It stands to reason that the cognitive control system must represent goal-relevant information in a format that is compatible with such fl exibility.There are two general modes of information processing that underlie thoughts and behaviors, automatic and controlled. Automatic processes are relatively simple, straightforward, refl exive reactions to whatever information happens to be fl owing into the senses at a given moment. By contrast, controlled processes are engaged when a task has additional constraints and requires knowledge about goals and means.From this brief review of some of the main characteristics of controlled processing, it is possible to make some predictions about the nature of any brain system involved in goal-directed (executive) control of cognitive functions:1. It must have extensive and diverse connections to other regions of the brain in order to have access to information from, as well as infl uence, widespread brain systems. 2. It needs to have information about goals and the means to achieve them, and this necessarily involves representing diverse multivariate relationships between a wide variety of sensory information, stored knowledge, actions, and consequences. It needs to be plastic and modifi able by experience in order to acquire this information. 3. There must be short-term storage mechanisms to keep goal-related information online and available until the goal is achieved. 4. It must represent goal-related information in a form that is fl exible and easy to modify.For many reasons, many investigators have argued that the neural instantiation of executive functions are, to a large degree, in the PFC. The remainder of this chapter discusses why.The PFC consists of a collection of cortical areas that differ from one another on the basis of size, density, and distribution of their neurons. Its location in the human brain and major divisions in the monkey brain are shown in ANATOMY AND ORGANIZATION OF THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX differences in function The dorsolateral and ventrolateral portions of the PFC receive visual, auditory, and somatosensory information from the occipital, temporal, and parietal cortices, whereas orbitofrontal cortex receives chemosensory and visceral information The dorsal PFC, particularly dorsolateral area 46, has preferential connections with many motor system structures, and may be the primary region by which the PFC exerts control over behavior. Dorsolateral area 46 is interconnected with motor areas in the medial frontal lobe such as the supplementary motor area (SMA), pre-SMA, and the rostral cingulate, with the premotor cortex on the lateral frontal lobe, and with cerebellum and superior colliculus. Dorsolateral area 46 also sends projections to area 8, which contains the frontal eye fi elds, a region important for voluntary shifts of gaze. As with sensory cortex, there are no direct connections between the PFC and primary motor cortex; the PFC is instead connected with premotor areas that, in turn, send projections to primary motor cortex and the spinal cord. Also important are the dense interconnections between the PFC and basal ganglia (see later).The basal ganglia (BG) are a set of subcortical structures that are closely associated with both the motor system and the PFC. The anatomy of the BG are similar to that of the PFC in that they receive converging inputs from virtually every cortical system and many subcortical structures. The region of the BG that receives inputs, the striatum (which includes the caudate and putamen) receives a heavy projection from the PFC. Information then travels through loops of subcortical nuclei, which project back to the frontal cortex via the thalamus. Whereas the PFC projects back to the same wide range of cortical areas that give input to the basal ganglia, the basal ganglia project largely to the frontal lobe motor system structures and the PFC. Thus, the BG are well-positioned to infl uence a wide range of brain functions, albeit with an emphasis on motor output. The anatomical "loops" between the PFC and BG have inspired theories of their close interdependency. This will be discussed later. Basal ganglia anatomy and functions are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 31.The orbitofrontal PFC is more closely associated with medial temporal limbic structures critical for long-term memory and "internal" information, such as affect and motivation, than other PFC regions. It has direct and indirect (via the thalamus) connections with the hippocampus and associated neocortex, the amygdala and hypothalamus. It has strong connections with olfactory and gustatory cortices, but weaker connections than the lateral PFC to parietal and temporal cortices.Like most of the neocortex, many PF connections are local. There are not only interconnections between the major subdivisions, but also interconnections between their constituent areas. The lateral PFC is particularly well connected. Ventrolateral areas 12 and 45 are interconnected with dorsolateral areas 46 and 8, with dorsal area 9 as well as with orbitofrontal areas 11 and 13. Intrinsic PFC connections presumably allow information from a given PFC afferent or from a given process within a PFC subregion to be distributed to other parts of the PFC.The PFC is anatomically well situated to play a role in cognitive control. It receives information from and sends projections to forebrain systems that process information about the external world, motor system structures that produce voluntary movement, systems that consolidate long-term memories, and systems that process information about affect and motivational state. This anatomy long has suggested that the PFC may be important for synthesizing external and internal information needed to produce complex behavior.The PFC occupies a far greater proportion of the human cerebral cortex than in other animals, suggesting that it might contribute to those elusive cognitive capacities that separate humans from animals. However, unlike electrical stimulation of more posterior regions that produce hallucinations or motoric responses, stimulation of the PFC produces no obvious effect. This led it to be termed silent cortex. Similarly, at fi rst glance, PFC damage has remarkably little overt effect; patients can perceive and move, there is little impairment in their memory, and they can appear remarkably normal in casual conversation. The most infamous case is that of Phineas Gage, a railway construction foreman. In 1848 he suffered an accident in which an iron bar exploded and was projected up through his chin and out of the top of his head, destroying much of his medial PFC in the process Despite the superfi cial appearance of normality, PFC damage seems to devastate a person's life. Take the case of Elliot, a successful, happily married accountant, and by all accounts a responsible person. In his late thirties, he was diagnosed as having a prefrontal meningioma, and during the removal of the tumor his PFC was damaged. Within a few of years of the operation, Elliot had divorced his wife, got married and divorced again, lost touch with his family and friends, acquired a disreputable business partner, and lost his business. All of Elliot's basic mental functions seemed to be intact, his language and memory abilities seemed normal, and on tests of intelligence he consistently performed in the superior range. What Elliot seemed to lack was the ability to coordinate his mental functions in a manner that took long-term concerns (unseen goals) into account. He became impulsive, lurching from one catastrophe to another based on his momentary whims.Note that this scenario is exactly what would be expected from the loss of a cognitive control system. Damage to the higher-order, executive functions leaves the components of complex behavior intact and able to be elicited by the appropriate external trigger. But the individual would not be able to coordinate these behaviors with respect to goals and task-specifi c constraints. For example, there was a PFC patient who, when preparing coffee, fi rst stirred and then added cream. Because of this apparent dysfunction in the top-down control over behavior, the pattern of defi cits following frontal lobe damage has been thought to refl ect a lack of goal-directedness, and the result is called the dysexecutive syndrome (see Box 52.2).One of the most striking features of prefrontal patients is their disinhibition and lack of behavioral control. The patients are often impulsive, quick to anger, and prone to making rude and childish remarks. For example, one patient complained of being "much more outspoken" since her injury, and another stated, "I've become impulsive since the accident. If I have something to say I can't wait and have to say it straight away."An example of disinhibition is utilization behavior. During a medical examination, a patient with PFC damage will pick up and use items that have been left on the doctor's desk. For example, the doctor might leave a comb on the desk, and the patient will pick the comb up and start combing his or her hair. In one extreme case a patient used a urinal that the doctor had left on the desk! More formal tests of disinhibition include the Stroop test Such tests require patients to inhibit previously established specifi c responses, but PFC patients are also impaired at inhibiting more abstract behavioral demands like rules. Consider the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) From 