Copyright Elsevier BVIn this third edition of Fundamental Neuroscience, we have tried to improve on the second edition with a volume that effectively introduces students to the full range of contemporary neuroscience. Neuroscience is a large fi eld founded on the premise that all of behavior and all of mental life have their origin in the structure and function of the nervous system. Today, the need for a single-volume introduction to neuroscience is greater than ever. Towards the end of the 20 th century, the study of the brain moved from a peripheral position within both the biological and psychological sciences to become an interdisciplinary fi eld that is now central within each discipline. The maturation of neuroscience has meant that individuals from diverse backgrounds-including molecular biologists, computer scientists, and psychologists-are interested in learning about the structure and function of the brain and about how the brain works. In addition, new techniques and tools have become available to study the brain in increasing detail. In the last 15 years new genetic methods have been introduced to delete or over-express single genes with spatial and temporal specifi city. Neuroimaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging have been developed that allow study of the living human brain while it is engaged in cognition.This third edition attempts to capture the promise and excitement of this fast-moving discipline. All the chapters have been rewritten to make them more concise. As a result the new edition is about 30% shorter than previous editions but still covers the same comprehensive range of topics. The volume begins with an opening chapter that provides an overview of the discipline. A second chapter presents fundamental information about the architecture and anatomy of nervous systems. The remainder of the volume presents the major topics of neuroscience. The second section considers the cellular and subcellular organization of neurons, the physiology of nerve cells, and how signaling occurs between neurons. The third section includes discussion of neural induction, cell fate, migration, process outgrowth, development of dendrites, synapse formation, programmed cell death, synapse elimination, and early experience including critical periods. The fourth and fi fth sections describe the neural organization of each sensory modality and the organization of the brain pathways and systems important for locomotion, voluntary action, and eye movements. The sixth section describes the variety of hypothalamic and extra-hypothalamic systems that support motivation, reward, and internal regulation, including cardiovascular function, respiration, food and water intake, neuroendocrine function, circadian rhythms, and sleep and dreaming. The fi nal section describes the neural foundations of the so-called higher mental functions including perception, attention, memory, language, spatial cognition, and executive function. Additional chapters cover human brain evolution, cognitive development and aging, and consciousness. The volume will be accompanied by an easily accessible companion website, which will present all the fi gures and increase the fl exibility with which the material can be used.The authors listed at the ends of the chapters and boxes are working scientists, experts in the topics they cover. The Editors edited the chapters to achieve consistency of style and content. At Academic PressElsevier Science, the project was coordinated by Hilary Rowe and Nikki Levy, and we are grateful to them for their leadership and advice throughout the project. In addition, Meg Day very capably coordinated the production of the book with the help of Sarah Hajduk and Christie Jozwiak.The Editors of Fundamental Neuroscience hope that users of this book, and especially the students who will become the next generation of neuroscientists, fi nd the subject matter of neuroscience as interesting and exciting as we do. Nicholas C. Spitzer is Distinguished Professor in the Division of Biological Sciences at the University of California, San Diego. His research is focused on neuronal differentiation and the role of electrical activity and calcium signaling in the assembly of the nervous system. He has been chairman of the Biology Department and the Neurobiology Section, a trustee of the Grass Foundation, and served as Councilor of the Society for Neuroscience. He is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and Co-Director of the Kavli Institute for Brain and Mind.The fi eld of knowledge described in this book is neuroscience, the multidisciplinary sciences that analyze the nervous system to understand the biological basis for behavior. Modern studies of the nervous system have been ongoing since the middle of the nineteenth century. Neuroanatomists studied the brains shape, its cellular structure, and its circuitry neurochemists studied the brains chemical composition, its lipids and proteins neurophysiologists studied the brains bioelectric properties and psychologists and neuropsychologists investigated the organization and neural substrates of behavior and cognition.The term neuroscience was introduced in the mid1960s, to signal the beginning of an era in which each of these disciplines would work together cooperatively, sharing a common language, common concepts, and a common goal-to understand the structure and function of the normal and abnormal brain. Neuroscience today spans a wide range of research endeavors from the molecular biology of nerve cells to the biological basis of normal and disordered behavior, emotion, and cognition. For a more complete, but concise, history of the neurosciences see Neuroscience is currently one of the most rapidly growing areas of science. Indeed, the brain is sometimes referred to as the last frontier of biology. In 1971, 1100 scientists convened at the fi rst annual meeting of the Society for Beginning students of neuroscience justifi ably could fi nd themselves confused. Nervous systems of many organisms have their cell assemblies and macroscopically visible components named by multiple overlapping and often synonymous terms. With a necessarily gracious view to the past, this confusing terminology could be viewed as the intellectual cost of focused discourse with predecessors in the enterprise. The nervous systems of invertebrate organisms often are designated for their spatially directed collections of neurons responsible for local control of operations, such as the thoracic or abdominal ganglia, which receive sensations and direct motoric responses for specifi c body segments, all under the general control of a cephalic ganglion whose role includes sensing the external environment.In vertebrates, the components of the nervous system were named for both their appearance and their location. As noted by Swanson, and expanded upon in Chapter 2 of this volume, the names of the major parts of the brain were based on creative interpretations of early dissectors of the brain, attributing names to brain segments based on their appearance in the freshly dissected state: hippocampus or amygdala, cerebrum, and cerebellum.This book lays out our current understanding in each of the important domains that together defi ne the full scope of modern neuroscience. The structure and function of the brain and spinal cord are most appropriately understood from the perspective of their highly specialized cells: the neurons, the interconnected, highly differentiated, bioelectrically driven, cellular units of the nervous system and their more numerous support cells, the glia. Given the importance of these cellular building blocks in all that follows, a brief overview of their properties may be helpful.Neurons are classifi ed in many different ways, according to function, location The sites of interneuronal communication in the central nervous system are termed synapses in the CNS and junctions in somatic, motor, and autonomic nervous systems. Paramembranous deposits of specifi c proteins essential for transmitter release, response, and catabolism characterize synapses and junctions morphologically. These specialized sites are presumed to be the active zone for transmitter release and response. Paramembranous proteins constitute a specialized junctional adherence zone, termed the synaptolemma. Like peripheral junctions, central synapses also are denoted by accumulations of tiny organelles, termed synaptic vesicles. The proteins of these vesicles have been shown to have specifi c roles in transmitter storage vesicle docking onto presynaptic membranes, voltage-and Ca 2 -dependent secretion, and the recycling and restorage of previously released transmitter molecules.Synaptic arrangements in the CNS fall into a wide variety of morphological and functional forms that are specifi c for the neurons involved. The most common arrangement, typical of hierarchical pathways, is either the axodendritic or the axosomatic synapse, in which the axons of the cell of origin make their functional contact with the dendrites or cell body of the target neuron, respectively. A second category of synaptic arrangement is more rare-forms of functional contact between adjacent cell bodies and overlapping dendrites. Within the spinal cord and some other fi elds of neuropil, serial axoaxonic synapses are relatively frequent. Here, the axon of an interneuron ends on the terminal of a long-distance neuron as that terminal contacts a dendrite, or on the segment of the axon that is immediately distal to the soma, termed the initial segment, where action potentials arise. Many presynaptic axons contain local collections of typical synaptic vesicles with no opposed specialized synaptolemma. These are termed boutons en passant. The release of a transmitter may not always occur at such sites.As with their structural representations, the qualities of synaptic transmission can also be functionally categorized in terms of the nature of the neurotransmitter that provides the signaling the nature of the receptor molecule on the postsynaptic neuron, gland, or muscle and the mechanisms by which the postsynaptic cell transduces the neurotransmitter signal into transmembrane changes. So-called "fast" or "classical" neurotransmission is the functional variety seen at the vast majority of synaptic and junctional sites, with a rapid onset and a rapid ending, generally employing excitatory amino acids or inhibitory amino acids as the transmitter. The effects of those signals are largely attributable to changes in postsynaptic membrane permeability to specifi c cations or anions and the resulting depolarization or hyperpolarization, respectively. Other neurotransmitters, such as the monoamines and many neuropeptides, produce changes in excitability that are much more enduring. Here the receptors activate metabolic processes within the postsynaptic cells-frequently to add or remove phosphate groups from key intracellular proteins multiple complex forms of enduring postsynaptic metabolic actions are under investigation. The brains richness of signaling possibilities comes from the interplay on common postsynaptic neurons of these multiple chemical signals.As research progressed, it became clear that neuronal functions could best be fi tted into nervous system function by considering their operations at four fundamental hierarchical levels: molecular, cellular, systems, and behavioral. These levels rest on the fundamental principle that neurons communicate chemically, by the activity-dependent secretion of neurotransmitters, at specialized points of contact named synapses.At the molecular level of operations, the emphasis is on the interaction of molecules-typically proteins that regulate transcription of genes, their translation into proteins, and their posttranslational processing. Proteins that mediate the intracellular processes of transmitter synthesis, storage, and release, or the intracellular consequences of intercellular synaptic signaling are essential neuronal molecular functions. Such transductive molecular mechanisms include the neurotransmitters receptors, as well as the auxiliary molecules that allow these receptors to infl uence the short-term biology of responsive neurons and their longer-term regulation. Completion of the human, chimpanzee, rat, and mouse genomes can be viewed as an extensive inventory of these molecular elements, more than half of which are thought to be either highly enriched in the brain or even exclusively expressed there.At the cellular level of neuroscience, the emphasis is on interactions between neurons through their synaptic transactions and between neurons and glia. Much current cellular level research focuses on the biochemical systems within specifi c cells that mediate such phenomena as pacemakers for the generation of circadian rhythms or that can account for activity-dependent adaptation. Research at the cellular level strives to determine which specifi c neurons and which of their most proximate synaptic connections may mediate a behavior or the behavioral effects of a given experimental perturbation.At the systems level, emphasis is on the spatially distributed sensors and effectors that integrate the bodys response to environmental challenges. There are sensory systems, which include specialized senses for hearing, seeing, feeling, tasting, and balancing the body. Similarly, there are motor systems for trunk, limb, and fi ne fi nger motions and internal regulatory systems for visceral regulation. These systems operate through relatively sequential linkages, and interruption of any link can destroy the function of the system. Systems level research also includes research into cellular systems that innervate the widely distributed neuronal elements of the sensory, motor, or visceral systems, such as the pontine neurons with highly branched axons that innervate diencephalic, cortical, and spinal neurons. Among the best studied of these divergent systems are the monoaminergic neurons, which have been linked to the regulation of many behavioral outputs of the brain, ranging from feeding, drinking, thermoregulation, and sexual behavior. Monoaminergic neurons also have been linked to such higher functions as pleasure, reinforcement, attention, motivation, memory, and learning. Dysfunctions of these systems have been hypothesized as the basis for some psychiatric and neurological diseases, supported by evidence that medications aimed at presumed monoamine regulation provide useful therapy.At the behavioral level of neuroscience research, emphasis is on the interactions between individuals and their collective environment. Research at the behavioral level centers on the integrative phenomena that link populations of neurons into extended specialized circuits, ensembles, or more pervasively distributed"systems" that integrate the physiological expression of a learned, refl exive, or spontaneously generated behavioral response. Behavioral research also includes the operations of higher mental activity, such as memory, learning, speech, abstract reasoning, and consciousness. Conceptually, "animal models" of human psychiatric diseases are based on the assumption that scientists can appropriately infer from observations of behavior and physiology that the states experienced by animals are equivalent to the emotional states experienced by humans expressing these same sorts of physiological changes.As the neuroscientifi c bases for some elemental behaviors have become better understood, new aspects of neuroscience applied to problems of daily life have begun to emerge. Methods for the noninvasive detection of activity in certain small brain regions have improved such that it is now possible to link these changes in activity with discrete forms of mental activity. These advances have given rise to the concept that it is possible to understand where in the brain the decision-making process occurs, or to identify the kinds of information necessary to decide whether to act or not. The detailed quantitative data that now exist on the details of neuronal structure, function, and behavior have driven the development of computational neurosciences. This new branch of neuroscience research seeks to predict the performance of neurons, neuronal properties, and neural networks based on their discernible quantitative properties.The central nervous system is most commonly divided into major structural units, consisting of the major physical subdivisions of the brain. Thus, mammalian neuroscientists divide the central nervous system into the brain and spinal cord and further divide the brain into regions readily seen by the simplest of dissections. Based on research that has demonstrated that these large spatial elements derive from independent structures in the developing brain, these subdivisions are well accepted. Mammalian brain thusly is divided into hindbrain, midbrain, and forebrain, each of which has multiple highly specialized regions within it. In deference to the major differences in body structure, invertebrate nervous systems most often are organized by body segment Neurons within the vertebrate CNS operate either within layered structures or in clustered groupings. The specifi c connections between neurons within or across the macro-divisions of the brain are essential to the brains functions. It is through their patterns of neuronal circuitry that individual neurons form functional ensembles to regulate the fl ow of information within and between the regions of the brain.Present understanding of the cellular organization of the CNS can be viewed simplistically according to three main patterns of neuronal connectivity.Long hierarchical neuronal connections typically are found in the primary sensory and motor pathways. Here the transmission of information is highly sequential, and interconnected neurons are related to each other in a hierarchical fashion. Primary receptors transmit fi rst to primary relay cells, then to secondary relay cells, and fi nally to the primary sensory fi elds of the cerebral cortex. For motor output systems, the reverse sequence exists with impulses descending hierarchically from the motor cortex to the spinal motoneuron. It is at the level of the motor and sensory systems that beginning scholars of the nervous system will begin to appreciate the complexities of neuronal circuitry by which widely separated neurons communicate selectively. This hierarchical scheme of organization provides for a precise fl ow of information, but such organization suffers the disadvantage that destruction of any link incapacitates the entire system.Local circuit neurons establish their connections mainly within their immediate vicinity. Such local circuit neurons frequently are small and may have relatively few processes. Interneurons expand or constrain the fl ow of information within their small spatial domain and may do so without generating action potentials, given their short axons.Single-source divergent circuitry is utilized by certain neurons of the hypothalamus, pons, and medulla. From their clustered anatomical location, these neurons extend multiple branched and divergent connections to many target cells, almost all of which lie outside the brain region in which the neurons of origin are located. Neurons with divergent circuitry could be considered more as interregional interneurons rather than as sequential elements within any known hierarchical system. For example, different neurons of the noradrenergic nucleus, the locus coeruleus project from the pons to either the cerebellum, spinal cord, hypothalamus, or several cortical zones to modulate synaptic operations within those regions.Neurons are not the only cells in the CNS. According to most estimates, neurons are outnumbered, perhaps by an order of magnitude, by the various nonneuronal supportive cellular elements. Nonneuronal cells include macroglia, microglia, and cells of the brains blood vessels, cells of the choroid plexus that secrete the cerebrospinal fl uid, and meninges, sheets of connective tissue that cover the surface of the brain and comprise the cerebrospinal fl uid-containing envelope that protects the brain within the skull.Macroglia are the most abundant supportive cells some are categorized as astrocytes. Astrocytes play a variety of metabolic support roles, including furnishing energy intermediates and providing for the supplementary removal of excessive extracellular neurotransmitter secretions. A second prominent category of macroglia is the myelin-producing cells, the oligodendroglia. Myelin, made up of multiple layers of their compacted membranes, insulates segments of long axons bioelectrically and accelerates action potential conduction velocity. Microglia are relatively uncharacterized supportive cells believed to be of mesodermal origin and related to the macrophagemonocyte lineage. Some microglia reside quiescently within the brain. During periods of intracerebral infl ammation, circulating macrophages and other white blood cells are recruited into the brain by endothelial signals to remove necrotic tissue or to defend against the microbial infection.The blood-brain barrier is an important permeability barrier to selected molecules between the bloodstream and the CNS. Evidence of a barrier is provided by the greatly diminished rate of access of most lipophobic chemicals between plasma and brain specifi c energy-dependent transporter systems permit selected access. Diffusional barriers retard the movement of substances from brain to blood as well as from blood to brain. The brain clears metabolites of transmitters into the cerebrospinal fl uid by excretion through the acid transport system of the choroid plexus. The blood-brain barrier is much less prominent in the hypothalamus and in several small, specialized organs lining the third and fourth ventricles of the brain: the median eminence, area postrema, pineal gland, subfornical organ, and subcommissural organ. The peripheral nervous system has no such diffusional barrier.Because neurons of the CNS are terminally differentiated cells, they cannot undergo proliferative responses to damage, as can cells of skin, muscle, bone, and blood vessels. Nevertheless, previously unrecognized neural stem cells can undergo regulated proliferation and provide a natural means for selected neuronal replacement in some regions of the nervous system. As a result, neurons have evolved other adaptive mechanisms to provide for the maintenance of function following injury. These adaptive mechanisms range from activity dependent regulation of gene expression, to modifi cation of synaptic structure, function, and can include actual localized axonal sprouting and new synapse creation. These adaptive mechanisms endow the brain with considerable capacity for structural and functional modifi cation well into adulthood. This plasticity is not only considered to be activity dependent, but also to be reversible with disuse. Plasticity is pronounced within the sensory systems, and is quite prominent in the motor systems as well. The molecular mechanisms employed in memory and learning may rely upon very similar processes as those involved in structural and functional plasticity.With these overview principles in place, which are detailed more extensively in Section II, we can resume our preview of this book. Another major domain of our fi eld is nervous system development. How does a simple epithelium differentiate into specialized collections of cells and ultimately into distinct brain structures How do neurons grow processes that fi nd appropriate targets some distance away How do nascent neuronal activity and embryonic experience shape activitySensory systems and motor systems encompass how the nervous system receives information from the external world and how movements and actions are produced. These questions range from the molecular level to the systems and behavioral level.An evolutionarily old function of the nervous system is to regulate respiration, heart rate, sleep and waking cycles, food and water intake, and hormones to maintain internal homeostasis and to permit daily and longer reproductive cycles. In this area of regulatory systems, we explore how organisms remain in balance with their environment, ensuring that they obtain the energy resources needed to survive and reproduce. At the level of cells and molecules, the study of regulatory systems concerns the receptors and signaling pathways by which particular hormones or neurotransmitters prepare the organism to sleep, to cope with acute stress, or to seek food or reproduce. At the level of brain systems, we ask such questions as what occurs in brain circuitry to produce thirst or to create a self-destructive problem such as drug abuseIn recent years, the disciplines of psychology and biology have increasingly found common ground, and this convergence of psychology and biology defi nes the modern topics of behavioral and cognitive neuroscience. These topics concern the so-called higher mental functions: perception, attention, language, memory, thinking, and the ability to navigate in space. Work on these problems traditionally has drawn on the techniques of neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neuropharmacology, and behavioral analysis. More recently, behavioral and cognitive neuroscience has benefi ted from several new approaches: the use of computers to perform detailed formal analyses of how brain systems operate and how cognition is organized noninvasive neuroimaging techniques, such as positron emission tomography and functional magnetic resonance imaging, to obtain pictures of the living human brain in action and molecular biological methods, such as single gene knockouts in mice, which can relate genes to brain systems and to behavior.This textbook is for anyone interested in neuroscience. In preparing it we have focused primarily on graduate students just entering the fi eld, understanding that some of you will have majored in biology, some in psychology, some in mathematics or engineering, and even some like me, in German literature. It is hoped that through the text, the explanatory boxes, and, in some cases, the supplementary readings, you will fi nd the book to be both understandable and enlightening. In many cases, advanced undergraduate students will fi nd this book useful as well.Medical students may fi nd that they need additional clinical correlations that are not provided here. However, it is hoped that most medical scholars at least will be able to use our textbook in conjunction with more clinically oriented material. Finally, to those who have completed their formal education, it is hoped that this text can provide you with some useful information and challenging perspectives, whether you are active neuroscientists wishing to learn about areas of the fi eld other than your own or individuals who wish to enter neuroscience from a different area of inquiry. We invite all of you to join us in the adventure of studying the nervous system.Many fi elds of clinical medicine are directly concerned with the brain. The branches of medicine tied most closely to neuroscience are neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry. Other fi elds of medicine also make important contributions, including radiology and pathology. To make connections to the many facets of medicine that are relevant to neuroscience, this book includes discussion of a limited number of clinical conditions in the context of basic knowledge in neuroscience.Less than a decade into the twenty-fi rst century, the Hubble space telescope continues to transmit information about the uncharted regions of the universe and clues to the origin of the cosmos. This same spirit of adventure also is being directed to the most complex structure that exists in the universe-the human brain. The complexity of the human brain is enormous, describable only in astronomical terms. For example, the number of neurons in the human brain is approximately equal to the number of stars in our Milky Way galaxy. Whereas the possibility of understanding such a complex device is certainly daunting, it is nevertheless true that an enormous amount has already been learned. The promise and excitement of research on the nervous system have captured the attention of thousands of students and working scientists. What is at stake is not only the possibility of discovering how the brain works. It is estimated that diseases of the brain, including both neurological and psychiatric illnesses, affect as many as 50 million individuals annually in the United States alone, at an estimated societal cost of hundreds of billions of dollars in clinical care and lost productivity. The prevention, treatment, and cure of these diseases will ultimately be found through neuroscience research. Moreover, many of the issues currently challenging societies globally-instability within the family, illiteracy, poverty, and violence, as well as improved individualized programs of education-could be illuminated by a better understanding of the brain.Possibly the single largest event in the history of biomedical research was publicly proclaimed in June 2000 and was presented in published form in February 2001: the initial inventory of the human genome. By using advanced versions of the powerful methods of molecular biology, several large scientifi c teams have been able to take apart all of an individuals human DNA in very refi ned ways, amplify the amounts of the pieces, determine the order of the nucleic acid bases in each of the fragments, and then put those fragments back together again across the 23 pairs of human chromosomes.Having determined the sequences of the nucleic acids, it was possible to train computers to read the sequence information and spot the specifi c signals that identify the beginning and ending of sequences likely to encode proteins. Furthermore, the computer systems could then sort those proteins by similarity of sequences within their amino acid building blocks. After sorting, the computers could next assign the genes and gene products to families of similar proteins whose functions had already been established. In this way, scientists were rapidly able to predict approximately how many proteins could be encoded by the genome. Whole genome data are now available for humans, for some nonhuman primates, for rats, and for mice.Scientifi cally, this state of information has been termed a "draft" because it is based on a very dense, but not quite complete, sample of the whole genome. What has been determined still contains a very large number of interruptions and gaps. Some of the smaller genes, whose beginning and ending are most certain, could be thought of as parts in a reassembled Greek urn, held in place by bits of blank clay until further excavation is done. However, having even this draft has provided some important realities.Similar routines allowed these genomic scholars to determine how many of those mammalian genes were like genes we have already recognized in the smaller genomes of other organisms mapped out previously Two major future vistas can be imagined. To create organisms as complex as humans from relatively so few genes probably means that the richness of the required proteins is based on their modifi cations, either during transcription of the gene or after translation of the intermediate messenger RNA into the THE GENOMIC INVENTORY IS A GIANT STEP FORWARD protein. These essential aspects of certain proteins account for a small number of brain diseases that can be linked to mutations in a single gene, such as Huntingtons Disease. Second, though compiling this draft inventory represents a stunning technical achievement, there remains the enormously daunting task of determining, for example, where in the brains circuits specifi c genes normally are expressed, and how that expression pattern may be altered by the demands of illness or an unfriendly environment. That task, at present, is one for which there are as yet no tools equivalently as powerful as those used to acquire the fl ood of sequence data with which we are now faced. This stage has been referred to as the end of "nave reductionism."In the fall of 2005, a six-nation consortium of molecular biologists announced the next phase of genomic research. The new focus will be toward refi ning the initial inventories to compare whole genomes of healthy and affected individuals for a variety of complex genetic illnesses. Complex genetic diseases, such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, asthma, depression, schizophrenia, and alcoholism, arise through the interactions of multiple short gene mutations that can increase or decrease ones vulnerability to a specifi c disease depending on individual life experiences. Ultimately, as the speeds of genome sequencing improve still further and the cost is reduced, it may be possible to predict what diseases will be more likely to affect a given person, and predict the lifestyle changes that person could undertake to improve his or her opportunities to remain healthy.In order to benefi t from the enormously rich potential mother lode of genetic information, next we must determine where these genes are expressed, what functions they can control, and what sorts of controls other gene products can exert over them. In the nervous system, where cell-cell interaction is the main operating system in relating molecular events to functional behavioral events, discovering the still-murky properties of activity-dependent gene expression will require enormous investment.As scientists, we draw from the work of those who came before us, using other scientists work as a foundation for our own. We build on and extend previous observations and, it is hoped, contribute something to those who will come after us. The information presented in this book is the culmination of hundreds of years of research. To help acquaint you with some of this work, we have described many of the key experiments of neuroscience throughout the book. We also have listed some of the classic papers of neuroscience and related fi elds at the end of each chapter, and invite you to read some of them for yourselves.The pursuit of science has not always been a communal endeavor. Initially, research was conducted in relative isolation. The scientifi c "community" that existed at the time consisted of intellectuals who shared the same general interests, terminology, and paradigms. For the most part, scientists were reluctant to collaborate or share their ideas broadly, because an adequate system for establishing priority for discoveries did not exist. However, with the emergence of scientifi c journals in 1665, scientists began disseminating their results and ideas more broadly because the publication record could be used as proof of priority. Science then began to progress much more rapidly, as each layer of new information provided a higher foundation on which new studies could be built.Gradually, an interactive community of scientists evolved, providing many of the benefi ts that contemporary scientists enjoy: Working as part of a community allows for greater specialization and effi ciency of effort. This not only allows scientists to study a topic in greater depth but also enables teams of researchers to attack problems from multidisciplinary perspectives. The rapid feedback and support provided by the community help scientists refi ne their ideas and maintain their motivation. It is this interdependence across space and time that gives science much of its power.With interdependence, however, comes vulnerability. In science, as in most communities, codes of acceptable conduct have evolved in an attempt to protect the rights of individuals while maximizing the benefi ts they receive. Some of these guidelines are concerned with the manner in which research is conducted, and other guidelines refer to the conduct of scientists and their interactions within the scientifi c community. Let us begin by examining how new knowledge is created.Over the years, a generally accepted procedure for conducting research has evolved. This process involves examining the existing literature, identifying an important question, and formulating a research plan. Often, new experimental pathways are launched when one scientist reads with skepticism the observations and interpretations of another and decides to test their validity. Sometimes, especially at the beginning of a new series of experiments, the research plan is purely "descriptive," for example, determining the structure of a protein or the distribution of a neurotransmitter in brain. Descriptive initial research is essential to the subsequent inductive phase of experimentation, the movement from observations to theory, seasoned with wisdom and curiosity. Descriptive experiments are valuable both because of the questions that they attempt to answer and because of the questions that their results allow us to ask. Information obtained from descriptive experiments provides a base of knowledge on which a scientist may draw to develop hypotheses about cause and effect in the phenomenon under investigation. For example, once we identify the distribution of a particular transmitter within the brain or the course of a pathway of connections through descriptive work, we may then be able to develop a theory about what function that transmitter or pathway serves.Once a hypothesis has been developed, the researcher then has the task of designing and performing experiments that are likely to disprove that hypothesis if it is incorrect. This is referred to as the deductive phase of experimentation, the movement from theory to observation. Through this paradigm the neuroscientist seeks to narrow down the vast range of alternative explanations for a given phenomenon. Only after attempting to disprove the hypothesis as thoroughly as possible may scientists be adequately assured that their hypothesis is a plausible explanation for the phenomenon under investigation.A key point in this argument is that data may only lend support to a hypothesis rather than provide absolute proof of its validity. In part, this is because the constraints of time, money, and technology allow a scientist to test a particular hypothesis only under a limited set of conditions. Variability and random chance may also contribute to the experimental results. Consequently, at the end of an experiment, scientists generally report only that there is a statistical probability that the effect measured was due to intervention rather than to chance or variability.Given that one can never prove a hypothesis, how do "facts" arise At the conclusion of their experiments, the researchers fi rst task is to report their fi ndings to the scientifi c community. The dissemination of research fi ndings often begins with an informal presentation at a laboratory or departmental meeting, eventually followed by presentation at a scientifi c meeting that permits the rapid exchange of information more broadly. One or more research articles published in peer-reviewed journals ultimately follow the verbal communications. Such publications are not simply a means to allow the authors to advance as professionals. Publication is an essential component of the advancement of science. As we have already stated, science depends on sharing information, replicating and thereby validating experiments, and then moving forward to solve the next problem. Indeed, a scientifi c experiment, no matter how spectacular the results, is not completed until the results are published. More likely, publication of "spectacular" results will provoke a skeptical scientist into doing an even more telling experiment, and knowledge will evolve.Although individuals or small groups may perform experiments, new knowledge is ultimately the product of the larger community. Inherent in such a system is the need to be able to trust the work of other scientists-to trust their integrity in conducting and reporting research. Thus, it is not surprising that much emphasis is placed on the responsible conduct of research.Research ethics encompasses a broad spectrum of behaviors. Where one draws the line between sloppy science and unethical conduct is a source of much debate within the scientifi c community. Some acts are considered to be so egregious that despite personal differences in defi ning what constitutes ethical behavior, the community generally recognizes certain research practices as behaviors that are unethical. These unambiguously improper activities consist of fabrication, falsifi cation, and plagiarism: Fabrication refers to making up data, falsifi cation is defi ned as altering data, and plagiarism consists of using another persons ideas, words, or data without attribution. Each of these acts signifi cantly harms the scientifi c community.Fabrication and falsifi cation in a research paper taint the published literature by undermining its integrity. Not only is the information contained in such papers misleading in itself, but other scientists may unwittingly use that information as the foundation for new research. If, when reported, these subsequent studies cite the previous, fraudulent publication, the literature is further corrupted. Thus, through a domino-like effect one paper may have a broad negative impact on the scientifi c literature. Moreover, when fraud is discovered, a retraction of the paper provides only a limited solution, as there is no guarantee that individuals who read the original article will see the retraction. Given the impact that just one fraudulent paper may have, it is not surprising that the integrity of published literature is a primary ethical concern for scientists.Plagiarism is also a major ethical infraction. Scientifi c publications provide a mechanism for establishing priority for a discovery. As such, they form the currency by which scientists earn academic positions, gain research grants to support their research, attract students, and receive promotions. Plagiarism denies the original author of credit for his or her work. This hurts everyone: The creative scientist is robbed of credit, the scientifi c community is hurt by the disincentive to share ideas and research results, and the individual who has plagiarized-like the person who has fabricated or falsifi ed data-may well fi nd his or her career ruined.In addition to the serious improprieties just described, which are in fact extremely rare, a variety of much more frequently committed "misdemeanors" in the conduct of research can also affect the scientifi c community. Like fabrication, falsifi cation, and plagiarism, some of these actions are considered to be unethical because they violate a fundamental value, such as honesty. For example, most active scientists believe that honorary authorship-listing as an author someone who did not make an intellectual contribution to the work-is unethical because it misrepresents the origin of the research. In contrast, other unethical behaviors violate standards that the scientifi c community has adopted. For example, although it is generally understood that material submitted to a peer-reviewed journal as part of a research manuscript has never been published previously and is not under consideration by another journal, instances of retraction for dual publications can be found on occasion.The serious misdeeds of fabrication, falsifi cation, and plagiarism generally are recognized throughout the scientifi c community. These were broadly recognized by federal regulations in 1999 as a uniform standard of scientifi c misconduct by all agencies funding research. What constitutes a misdemeanor is less clear, however, because variations in the defi nitions of accepted practices are common. There are several sources of this variation. Because responsible conduct is based in part on conventions adopted by a fi eld, it follows that there are differences among disciplines with regard to what is considered to be appropriate behavior. For example, students in neuroscience usually coauthor papers with their advisor, who typically works closely with them on their research. In contrast, students in the humanities often publish papers on their own even if their advisor has made a substantial intellectual contribution to the work reported. Within a discipline, the defi nition of acceptable practices may also vary from country to country. Because of animal use regulations, neuroscientists in the United Kingdom do relatively little experimental work with animals on the important topic of stress, whereas in the United States this topic is seen as an appropriate area of study so long as guidelines are followed to ensure that discomfort to the animals is minimized.The defi nition of responsible conduct may change over time. For example, some protocols that were once performed on human and animal subjects may no longer be considered ethical. Indeed, ethics evolve alongside knowledge. We may not currently be able to know all of the risks involved in a procedure, but as new risks are identifi ed, we must be willing to reconsider the facts and adjust our policies as necessary. In sum, what is considered to be ethical behavior may not always be obvious, and therefore we must actively examine what is expected of us as scientists.Having determined what is acceptable practice, we then must be vigilant. Each day neuroscientists are faced with a number of decisions having ethical implications, most of them at the level of misdemeanors: Should a data point be excluded because the apparatus might have malfunctioned Have all the appropriate references been cited and are all the authors appropriate Might the graphic representation of data mislead the viewer Are research funds being used effi ciently Although individually these decisions may not significantly affect the practice of science, cumulatively they can exert a great effect.In addition to being concerned about the integrity of the published literature, we must be concerned with our public image. Despite concerns over the level of federal funding for research, neuroscientists are among the privileged few who have much of their work funded by taxpayer dollars. Highly publicized scandals damage the public image of our profession and hurt all of us who are dependent on continued public support for our work. They also reduce the public credibility of science and thereby lessen the impact that we can expect our fi ndings to have. Thus, for our own good and that of our colleagues, the scientifi c community, and the public at large, we must strive to act with integrity.You are about to embark on a tour of fundamental neuroscience. Enjoy the descriptions of the current state of knowledge, read the summaries of some of the classic experiments on which that information is based, and consult the references that the authors have drawn on to prepare their chapters. Think also about the ethical dimensions of the science you are studyingyour success as a professional and the future of our fi eld depend on it.The brain often is compared with a computer these days. True, the brain is a computer, but it is a very special kind of computer-a biological computer that has evolved by natural selection over hundreds of millions of years and countless generations. Furthermore, it has no obvious design features in common with human-engineered computers. Instead, the brain is a unique organ that thinks and feels, generates behavioral interactions with the environment, keeps bodily physiology relatively stable, and enables reproduction of the species-its most important role from evolutions grand perspective. And for strictly personal reasons the brain is the most precious thing we have simply because it is the organ of consciousness, as refl ected in Ren Descartess famous seventeenth century aphorism, "I think therefore I am."Aristotle fi rst emphasized that structure and function are inextricably intertwined, two sides of the same coin, with structure providing obvious physical constraints on function. Just think about the difference between a hammer and a saw. Unfortunately, as knowledge becomes more and more specialized, there is a tendency to analyze the structure, function, and chemistry of the nervous system from different, sometimes even isolated, perspectives. The main theme of this chapter is the basic structure-function organization of the nervous system: what are the parts and how are they interconnected into functional systems In other words, what are the organizing principles-the basic design features-of its circuitryEvolution and development are two approaches often used to understand biological complexitybecause they start with the simplest condition-and the human brain is far and away the most complex object we know of, with its roughly 100 billion neurons and 100 trillion axonal connections between them. One remarkable conclusion emerging from these two perspectives is that nerve cells in all animals-from jellyfi sh to humans-are basically the same in terms of cell biology what changes most during ontogeny and phylogeny is the arrangement of nerve cells into functional circuits: the architecture of the nervous system. The "bricks" or "legos" are similar, but the "buildings" constructed with them can vary tremendously in size and functionality. An ultimate goal of neuroscience may be to understand the human brain, but remarkable progress can nevertheless be made through analyzing "lower" animals and early embryos. The other equally remarkable conclusion is that all vertebrates, from fi sh to humans, share a common basic plan of the nervous system, with the same major parts and functional systems.Protists and the simplest multicellular animals display ingestive, defensive, reproductive, and other behaviors without any nervous system whatsoever, raising the question: what is the adaptive value of adding a nervous system to an organism We will now examine key structure-function correlates of nervous system organization in animals with relatively simple body plans and behaviors.The Nerve Net Is the Simplest Type of Nervous SystemIn his provocative 1919 book, The Elementary Nervous System, George Parker outlined a reasonable scenario for how nervous systems evolved. An updated version begins with the fi rst multicellular animals-similar to modern-day sponges-that emerged over half a billion years ago. They are seemingly amorphous animals that spend their adult lives immobile, submerged in water. Their relatively simple behavior is mediated largely by a set of primitive smooth muscle cell sphincters allowing water fl ow through body wall pores. These specialized cells are called independent effectors because their contraction is evoked by stimuli like stretch or environmental chemicals acting directly on the plasma membrane of individual cells.The fi rst animal phylum with a nervous system was the Cnidaria, which includes jellyfi sh, corals, anemones, and the elegantly simple hydra. In contrast to sponges, hydra locomote and show active feeding behavior The cell theory, which states that all organisms are composed of individual cells, was developed around the middle of the nineteenth century by Mattias Schleiden and Theodor Schwann. However, this unitary vision of the cellular nature of life was not immediately applied to the nervous system, as most biologists at the time believed in the cytoplasmic continuity of nervous system cells. Later in the century the most prominent advocate of this reticularist view was Camillo Golgi, who proposed that axons entering the spinal cord actually fuse with other axons In 1897, Charles Sherrington postulated that neurons establish functional contact with each other and with other cell types via a theoretical structure he called the synapse. It was not until 50 years later that the structural existence of synapses was demonstrated by electron microscopy Hydras body wall is simple, with an outer ectoderm layer contacting the external environment, an inner endoderm layer facing the body cavitys internal environment and promoting digestion and waste elimination, and a vague middle or meso layer in between. Neurons probably differentiated initially from the ectoderm, and perhaps the fi rst to evolve were sensory neurons. One cytoplasmic extension of these bipolar cells facing the external environment became specialized to detect stimuli much weaker than those activating independent effectors, whereas the other pole became specialized to transmit information about these stimuli to a group of independent effectors  Increased stimulus sensitivity  Faster effector cell responses  Stronger behavioral responses because multiple effector cells are infl uenced  Sensory neurons responding to different stimulus modalities can be distributed strategically in different body regionsThe bipolar shape of sensory neurons is fundamentally important. The prototypical theory about neural circuit organization was presented by Santiago Ramn y Cajal in his classic "bible" of structural neuroscience, The Histology of the Nervous System in Man and A second stage of differentiation or complexity in hydras nervous system was the addition of neurons between sensory and effector. They are defi ned as motor neurons because they directly innervate effector cells, which in turn receive their inputs from sensory neurons. Conceptually, this provides a twolayered nervous system: the fi rst or top layer having sensory neurons and the second or bottom layer having motor neurons. In this prototypical network sensory neurons project to multiple motoneurons, and then each motoneuron innervates a set of effector cells. During an animals normal behavior, information fl ow is unidirectional or polarized from one cell type, sensory neuron, to another cell type, motoneuron, to a third cell type, effector. This is the basic defi nition of a simple refl ex, as defi ned by Charles Sherrington in his cornerstone of systems neuroscience, The Integrative Action of the Nervous System In this hypothetical scenario Another general feature of the hydra two-layered nervous system has been observed: sensory neurons do not innervate each other, whereas motoneurons do interact directly. Here, motoneurons have two projection classes: one to effector cells and another to other motoneurons. Structurally and functionally, many of these hydra motoneurons also have two types of output processes. One is a typical axon innervating an effector cell population. However, the other is a process that contacts homologous processes from other motoneurons. Interestingly, many of these "horizontal" processes between motoneurons transmit information in either direction-either motoneuron can transmit information to the other via these processes. This is an exception to the functional polarity rule and is mediated by reciprocal rather than the more common unidirectional synapses. Adding a second layer to the nervous system has obvious adaptive advantages related to increased capacity for response complexity and integration. Consider a stimulus to one specifi c part of the animal or even one sensory neuron. Its infl uence may radiate to distant parts of the animal because one sensory neuron innervates multiple motoneurons, those motoneurons innervate additional motoneurons, and each motoneuron innervates multiple effector cells-an example of what Cajal called avalanche conduction. There may be great divergence between stimulus and effector cells producing a response, with the actual divergence pattern shaped by the structure-function architecture of the nervous system: how the neurons and their interconnections are arranged in the body. It is easy to imagine how this arrangement in hydra might coordinate the tentacles to bring a food morsel detected by just one of them to the mouth, or how it might coordinate locomotion A second basic consequence of this structural arrangement is information convergence in the nervous system. Just consider a particular motoneuron: it can receive inputs from more than one sensory neuron and from other motoneurons as well.At fi rst glance hydras nervous system is distributed fairly uniformly around the radially symmetrical body wall and tentacles In contrast to cnidarians, fl atworms are bilaterally symmetrical predators with rostral and caudal ends, and dorsal and ventral surfaces. These changes in body plan and behavior are accompanied by equally important changes in nervous system organization. Many fl atworm neurons are clustered into distinct ganglia interconnected by longitudinal and transverse axon bundles called nerve cords Flatworms are the simplest animals with an abundant, clearly distinct third neuron division, interneurons, which are interpolated between sensory and motor neurons One consequence of adding a third "layer" of neurons to the nervous system is simply to increase convergence and divergence of information processing, and thus the capacity for response complexity. There are, however, three other critical functions interneurons subserve. They can act as excitatory or inhibitory "switches" in neuronal networks, assemblies of them can act as pattern detectors and generators between sensory and motor neurons, and they can be pacemakers if they generate intrinsic rhythmical activity patterns.The nerve net of hydra, a simple cnidarian, is spread diffusely throughout the body wall of the animal. This drawing shows maturation of the nerve net in a hydra bud, starting near the base and fi nishing near the tentacles. Refer to Longitudinal nerve cord Transverse nerve cord FIGURE 2.5 The nervous system of the planarian, a fl atworm, includes longitudinal and transverse nerve cords associated with centralization, and two fused cephalic ganglia in the rostral end associated with cephalization. Centralization and cephalization probably are related to the fl atworms bilateral symmetry and ability to swim forward rapidly. Refer to The omnidirectional information fl ow typical of cnidarian nerve nets is unusual in the rest of the animal kingdom, where most neurons are functionally polarSantiago Ramn y Shortly after Jacob Schleiden, Theodor Schwann, and Rudolf Virchow proposed the cell theory in the late 1830s, Joseph von Gerlach, Sr. and Otto Deiters suggested that nerve tissue was special in the sense that nerve cells are not independent units but instead form a continuous syncytium or reticular net Cajals second major conceptual achievement was the theory of functional polarity, which stated that the dendrites and cell bodies of neurons receive information, whereas the single axon with its collaterals transmits information to the other cells. This rule allows prediction of information fl ow direction through neural circuits based on the morphology or shape of individual neurons forming them, and it was the cornerstone of Charles Around the close of the nineteenth century, Cajal made a remarkable series of discoveries at the cellular level. In addition to the two concepts outlined earlier, they include the mode of axon termination in the adult CNS, the dendritic spine, the fi rst diagrams of refl ex pathways based on the neuron doctrine and functional polarity, the axonal growth cone, the chemotactic theory of synapse specifi city, and the hypothesis that learning could be based on the selective strengthening of synapses.In one of the great ironies in the history of neuroscience, Cajal and Golgi shared the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1906 though they had used the same technique to elaborate fundamentally different views on nervous system organization The meeting in Stockholm may not have diminished the great personal friction between them. In 1931 Cajal wrote: "What a cruel irony of fate to pair like Siamese twins united by the shoulders, scientifi c adversaries of such contrasting characters."ized with information fl owing through neural circuits sequentially from dendrites and cell body to axon and axon terminals. However, most invertebrate motoneurons and interneurons are unipolar: a single process, the axon, extends from the cell body. Dendrites branch from the axons in the center of a ganglion-entering the neuropil-where most synapses are formed Features of simple nervous systems are preserved throughout evolution. For example, the part of nervous system in the wall of the human gastrointestinal tract has many features of a highly refi ned nerve net, and a "layer" of amacrine interneurons is found in the human retina and olfactory bulb.Annelid worms and arthropods have even more complex body plans and behaviors than fl atworms, partly because of segmentation. Body segments are repeated serially along the bodys rostrocaudal axis, and presumably share a common underlying genetic developmental program, although terminal differentiation may vary. This strategy allows for more complex body plans to evolve without a linear or exponential increase in genetic material. Annelids and all the more complex invertebrates share another characteristic feature, a ventral nerve cord with a pair of ganglia in each segment, and longitudinal axon bundles between ganglia in adjacent segments Vertebrates are a subphylum of the Chordates and are the most complex of all animals in terms of structure and behavior. They share a basic body plan where common organ systems are arranged in a relatively strict anatomical relationship with one another The vertebrate nervous systems basic parts are revealed in the lancelet, a simple, nonvertebrate chordate. The lancelet is a slender, fi sh-like fi lter-feeder living half buried in the sand of shallow, tropical marine waters Although typical vertebrate brain regions are not obvious rostrally in the lancelet nerve cord, genes specifying early vertebrate head embryogenesis also are expressed rostrally in the lancelet body. Thus, some components of the molecular program specifying modern vertebrate head development apparently were present early in chordate evolution The cniderian nerve net displays most of the basic cellular features of nervous system organization, including convergence and divergence of sensory andVentral nerve cord Segmental nerves Cerebral ganglia FIGURE 2.7 Nervous system organization in the rostral end of an annelid worm. A ventral nerve cord with more or less distinct ganglia connects with a fused pair of cerebral ganglia dorsal to the pharynx. Note nerves extending from ventral nerve cord and cerebral ganglia. Refer to EVOLUTION HIGHLIGHTS: GENERAL ORGANIZING PRINCIPLES motor information. In more complex bilaterally symmetrical invertebrates, neurons and axons tend to aggregate in ganglia, nerve cords, and nerves, and there is a greater concentration of neurons and sensory organs in the bodys rostral end. Segmented invertebrates have a ventral nerve cord that includes a bilateral pair of ganglia in each segment. The primitive chordate, lancelet, displays the basic nervous system organization characteristic of vertebrates, including mammals and humans.One nineteenth century biology triumph was the demonstration that early stages of embryogenesis are fundamentally the same in all vertebrates. The CNS and heart are the fi rst organs to differentiate in the embryo, and the basic CNS divisions differentiating early in development are also common to all vertebrates. The names and arrangement of these divisions are the starting point for regional or topographic neuroanatomical nomenclature During embryogenesis the CNS develops as a hollow cylinder from a topologically fl at sheet of cells, by a process of neurulation. Here we simply consider macroscopic structural changes during the transformation.The neural plate is a spoon-shaped differentiation of the trilaminar embryonic discs one-cell-thick ectodermal layer The problem is especially diffi cult in human anatomy where use of an idiosyncratic terminology has a long, ingrained tradition. The basic principles are much easier to illustrate than to describe in writing between optic vesicles and rostral end of the notochord, and indicating the presumptive pituitary stalk and the otic rhombomere, a swelling near the center of what will become the hindbrain At the junction between neural plate and remaining ectoderm lies a narrow strip of transitional ectoderm, the neural crest, a distinctive vertebrate feature In summary, the CNS and PNS divisions are represented by the neural plate and neural crest, respectively, during the neural plate stage of vertebrate development. The two major CNS divisions, brain and spinal cord, are also indicated in the neural plate, which at this developmental stage is topologically simple: a bilaterally symmetrical, fl at sheet that is one cell thick.As neurulation progresses, the neural plate becomes U-shaped as the two halves become vertically oriented The neural plate is a spoon-shaped region of ectoderm forming the CNS surrounding it is somatic ectoderm. The neural plate is polarized, bilaterally symmetrical, and regionalized. The neural crest is a zone between neural and somatic ectoderm, and a series of placodes develops as "islands" within the somatic ectoderm. The neural crest and placodes generate PNS neurons. The approximate location of future CNS divisions in the neural plate is shown in color on the left. The same color scheme is used in Figs. 2.11, 2.12, and 2.14. Refer to Marcello Malpighi, the great seventeenth century founder of histology who also discovered the capillary network between arteries and veins postulated by William Harvey in 1628, recognized that the early chick neural tube displays three rostrocaudally arranged swellings now called primary brain vesicles. They include the forebrain vesicle, with the optic stalks and infundibulum the midbrain vesicle and the hindbrain vesicle, with the otic rhombomere These vesicles are the fundamental structural or regional brain divisions. Transitory rhombomeres are the most characteristic hindbrain vesicle feature at this stage, and they develop in association with the pharyngeal pouches. As embryogenesis continues, the forebrain vesicle divides into endbrain and interbrain vesicles, whereas the hindbrain vesicle differentiates vaguely into rostral pontine and caudal medullary regions The neural tube lumen becomes the adult CNS ventricular system In the early fi ve secondary vesicle neural tube, cells divide repeatedly although the neural tube remains one cell thick, a pseudostratifi ed epithelium of stem cells for neurons and glia. Shortly thereafter many of these cells begin a terminal differentiation into young neurons migrating from the luminal proliferation zone to form a new, more superfi cial mantle layer. In some CNS regions mantle layer neurons segregate into layers parallel to the surface, whereas in others neurons cluster in nuclei, relatively uniform neuron populations that are structurally distinct from surrounding nuclear or layered regions.Mantle layer formation leads to further CNS regionalization Ventral mantle layer formation accompanies the transient appearance of a longitudinal groove on the neural tubes inner surface. The leading nineteenth century Swiss embryologist Wilhelm His noted that the limiting sulcus divides much of the neural tube into dorsal or alar plate and ventral or basal plate, with predominantly sensory and motor functions, respectively The nervous systems wiring diagram can be described in terms of the neuronal cell types in each of its distinct gray matter regions and their stereotyped pattern of axonal projections to cell types both locally and in other gray matter regions or other tissues. A long-term goal of systems neuroscience is to provide a global wiring diagram for the nervous system that systematically accounts for its various functional subsystems-analogous to the circulatory system model provided by Harvey. Little work has been done on this synthetic problem, although interest is accelerating with the development of online neuroinformatics workbenches for connectional information The high-level model of nervous system information processing shown in In essence, the model postulates that behavior is determined by CNS motor system output, and that this output is a function of three inputs: sensory system, cognitive system, and intrinsic behavioral state system. The relative importance of each input in controlling motor output varies qualitatively in different species and quantitatively in different individuals. Note that behavior elicits sensory feedback from the external and internal environments that helps determine future motor activity and thus behavior. Each component is now considered further without trying to place all nervous system parts within the global model.There are three different motor systems: skeletal, autonomic, and neuroendocrine. The fi rst controls striated muscles responsible for voluntary behavior the second controls smooth and cardiac muscle, and many glands and the third controls pituitary gland hormone secretion. The skeletal motor system is understood best and thus serves as a prototype for examining basic organizing principles presumably similar for all three.The skeletal motor system is arranged hierarchically The MPGs and MPIs themselves are hierarchically arranged. This organization is particularly easy to see conceptually for the MPGs subserving locomotor behavior. In the spinal cord, simple MPGs coordinate FIGURE 2.15 Mini atlases to compare major adult brain regions in humans and mice. The brains are cut approximately transversely to the CNS longitudinal axis and illustrate fi ve major levels, arranged from rostral to caudal: a, endbrain b, interbrain c, midbrain d, pons and e, medulla. The color scheme follows that in Figs. 2.10-2.12 and 2.14, with the choroid plexus of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles shown in red. Adapted from A set of sensory systems provides information to the CNS from various receptor types, and all the systems can function simultaneously. Cajal noted that unimodal sensory pathways generally branch with some information going directly to the motor system and some going to the cerebral cortex for sensation and perception. The former typically evokes refl ex behavior and the latter potentially reaches consciousness and plays an important role in cognition.Several general features characterize the sensory system. First, the CNS receives a wide range of information about the external environment and about the bodys internal state. Thus, sensory receptors lie near the bodys surface, deep within the body, and even within the brain itself. Second, each of the three motor systems receives a broad range of sensory inputs. Third, the range of sensory modalities is remarkably similar across vertebrate classes, and information about specifi c modalities enters the CNS through homologous cranial and spinal nerves in all vertebrates. And fourth, the number of synapses between sensory receptor and cerebral cortex varies in different systems. There is one synapse in the olfactory system, and at least four in the visual system.It is very likely that the cerebral cortex-along with its cerebral nuclei-is the most important, if not sole, part of the cognitive system and that the cerebral cortex is responsible for planning, prioritizing, initiating, and evaluating the consequences of voluntary behavior. The fundamental nature of voluntary behavior is obviously a diffi cult problem to address, but one useful approach is simply to compare it with refl exive behavior. Interestingly, most if not all behaviors mediated by skeletal muscle can be initiated either refl exively or voluntarily, as Descartes pointed out long ago. What seems to distinguish refl exive and voluntary behaviors most clearly is that the former involves a stereotyped response to a defi ned stimulus, whereas the latter is anticipatory, with a duration and content impossible to predict with anywhere near the same degree of certainty.The CNS generates considerable endogenous activity-it is defi nitely not just a passive system waiting to respond to sensory input, as the behaviorist approach a century ago assumed. All CNS parts apparently have a basal activity level that can be either increased or decreased. In many cases, it is still not established whether particular neuronal cell types generate intrinsic activity patterns. It is clear, however, that motoneurons and related MPGs do generate intrinsic activity as already noted, the embryonic spinal cord produces motor output before sensory circuits develop. Thus, in addition to the three extrinsic input types to the motor system illustrated in Certain CNS regions generate intrinsic rhythmic activity patterns. The most important rhythmic behavioral pattern is the sleep-wake cycle that is entrained to the day-night cycle by an endogenous circadian clock, the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus. The sleep-wake cycle is profoundly important because during sleep the body is maintained entirely by ongoing intrinsic and refl exive systems controlling behaviors like respiration and sustained sphincter contractions. In contrast, voluntary mechanisms dominate in wakefulness though refl exive and intrinsic mechanisms are also vitally important then.Behavioral state control is thus a fundamental intrinsic brain activity. Another aspect of behavioral state-arousal-is especially important during wakefulness. Arousal level generally is correlated with an animals motivational state or drive level. The neural system mediating drive is not fully elucidated but is critically dependent on the hypothalamus, and attainment of specifi c goal objects depends on the cognitive system. Arousal and drive may be controlled by subcortical systems but behaviors actual direction and prioritization mainly is determined cortically.The full identity of neural systems elaborating pleasure and pain is one of neurosciences deep mysteries. Many regard pleasure and pain as conscious expressions of positive and negative reinforcement, infl uencing how likely a particular voluntary behavior will be repeated or avoided in the future. Here, reinforcement depends on sensory feedback about a particular behav-iors consequences Specifi c neurotransmitter systems have been incorporated into models of CNS function since the 1950s. Two examples are cholinergic and noradrenergic systems, defi ned as the total sets of CNS neurons releasing acetylcholine or noradrenalin, respectively, as a neurotransmitter. In general, these systems are not obviously correlated with traditional CNS functional systems or major topographic partstypically they are not restricted to one functional system or one major CNS division, though some exceptions may exist. Thus, neurotransmitter systems are not functional systems in the traditional sense. However, they are conceptually or operationally important in helping defi ne circuits or functional systems infl uenced by particular drug actions. For example, administering centrally acting acetylcholine receptor agonists infl uences synapses in a variety of traditional functional systems, and the set of these functional systems could be defi ned as a pharmacological system with a specifi c set of behavioral and other responses. If a drug targeted for therapeutic reasons to a specifi c neural system, it will also act on other functional systems with appropriate cholinergic receptors. Responses in these other systems produce "side effects" that may be good or bad.Likewise, any gene products distribution pattern can also be used to defi ne a chemical, molecular, or neural gene expression system. For example, a system could be defi ned in terms of all neurons expressing the calbindin or m-opioid receptor gene, and expression of the corresponding gene might be prevented or altered in experimental knockout mice or natural mutations in genetic diseases. These alterations may produce an obvious and stereotyped phenotype or syndrome, but in most instances the gene normally is expressed in multiple functional systems and has complex physiological and behavioral effects.Finally, it is important to remember that a genetic program constructs the nervous systems basic macrocircuitry during embryogenesis. Determining the correspondence between gene expression networks and neural networks may be the ultimate achievement of systems neuroscience. The nervous systems microcircuitry-quantitative aspects of synapse number and strength associated with individual neurons-may be sculpted by experience throughout life.There is no simple relationship between the CNSs topographic or regional differentiation and its functional organization. So it is mistaken to assume a priori that CNS information simply is processed hierarchically with the spinal cord at the lowest level and the cerebral cortex at the top. An alternative view is that the CNS displays a network rather than hierarchical organization scheme-a circuit where the motor system is driven by sensory, cognitive, and intrinsic behavioral state inputs, and future motor activity is determined partly by sensory feedback about the initial behaviors consequences.Two major features complicate this simple network model. First, the motor system itself is organized hierarchically, whereas the sensory system transmits multiple modalities in parallel, and this sensory information can reach directly each level of the motor system hierarchy. And second, sensory information also reaches the intrinsic and cognitive systems. In fact, all three input systems are interconnected bidirectionally. The basic plan of neural circuit architecture must be understood on its own terms, not through simple preconceived ideas or superfi cial analogies with computers, the Internet, irrigation systems, or complicated robots. How traditional CNS functional systems relate to pharmacological systems and genetic networks remains to be determined.This section reviews structural neuroscience methods used to achieve our current-still very incomplete-understanding of nervous system architectural principles, and introduces the major nervous system components. Long experience teaches that nothing approaches actual dissection for gaining an appreciation of overall brain structure.The human brains macroscopic structure was observed by early Greek physician-philosophers and thoroughly understood by the early 1800s. However, its circuitrys astounding complexity was not appreciated until microscopy effectively identifi ed individual pathways and neuronal regions toward the end of the 1800s-applying to thin CNS tissue sections neurohistological reagents and reactions developed by the textile and photographic industries Perhaps the single most enduring contribution of nineteenth century neurohistology was Camillo Golgis 1873 silver impregnation method. The full morphology of individual neurons was visible for the fi rst time Unfortunately, Golgis method provided little information about longer CNS connections: axonal projections between nonadjacent regions. This was approached with methods selectively staining fi bers degenerating from pathological or experimental lesions. Augustus Waller showed that nerve transection causes the nerves distal segment to degenerate, inspiring his proposal that the cell body is the nerve cells "trophic center," which the axon depends on for survival. Thirty years later Bernard von Gudden showed that Wallerian degeneration may be accompanied by pathological changes in the cell body when its axon is FIGURE 2.18 Marchi and Algeri developed the fi rst method to stain selectively central pathways, revealing degenerating myelin sheaths of severed axons as black particles on a light background-effectively isolating degenerating from healthy sheaths in tissue sections. Anatomists could produce discrete CNS lesions in experimental animals and after several weeks trace the course of neural pathways arising in the lesioned region. The method was severely limited, however, because unmyelinated or thinly myelinated axons, and terminal fi elds, were unlabeled, and there were many "false-positive" results from transecting fi bers simply passing through the lesion.By the 1950s selective silver impregnation and degeneration methods were combined by Walle J.H. Nauta and colleagues to stain unmyelinated axons and their terminal fi elds. The CNS was remapped at fi ner resolution with these methods, which still suffered from the fi ber-of-passage problem and were not nearly as sensitive as the next generation of methods developed around 1970. Instead of relying on lesion-induced pathology the latter are based on a combination of physiological mechanisms in healthy neurons and histochemical detection of antibodies and complementary nucleic acid strands.Also in the 1950s, the electron microscope opened a whole world of ultrastructure previously only guessed at. It provided the fi rst glimpses of synapse structure, myelin sheath organization, and many cellular organelles. It also allowed biologists to examine in detail the biosynthetic apparatus residing within each cell.These methods provide far more detail about CNS connectivity patterns or circuit organization than ever before in many species. As a result, comparative neuroanatomy has fl ourished and forms a solid structural foundation on which contemporary physiological and behavioral studies are based.Overall, the nervous system is divided into CNS and PNS. However, this CNS-PNS distinction is just a gross anatomical convenience that ignores circuit organization because nerves contain axons from neuronal cell bodies in both CNS and peripheral ganglia.Functionally, the PNS has a sensory ganglion component with accompanying dorsal and ventral roots and functionally mixed nerves, the autonomic nervous systems motor ganglia and communicating roots, and the enteric nervous system Somatic afferents distribute near the body surface in a pattern refl ecting the body walls segmental origins: each spinal nerve innervates a narrow mediolateral band of skin called a dermatome Peripheral nerves often ramify and join with nerves from other segments to form plexi that serve as crossroads and distribution centers for peripheral nerves, allowing axons to reorganize into complex nerve bundles innervating body structures. Brachial and lumbosacral plexi at the base of the upper and lower limbs, respectively, are the largest examples of these perplexing structures that also provide great mechanical strength to nerves passing through the shoulders and hips, which may undergo extreme rotation. The ANS also has a bewildering variety of plexi in the abdomen and pelvis, where nerves converge and redistribute axons to their target organs.The ANS has anatomically and functionally sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions. The two divisions function in a kind of push-pull relationship with each other. One or the other is never completely on or off. Instead, there are degrees of sympathetic and parasympathetic tone. During sleep, certain involuntary functions like digestion are accelerated. Glands participating in digestion are activated parasympathetically and sympathetic tone is correspondingly decreased. In contrast, Walter B. Cannon noted almost a century ago that during the "fi ght or fl ight" reaction characterizing defensive behavior, sympathetic tone is markedly enhanced and parasympathetic tone is reduced sharply. Sympathetic outfl ow is vastly amplifi ed and coordinated through a set of ganglia and the adrenal medulla, so that sympathetic function occurs relatively synchronously throughout the body. In contrast, parasympathetic system is relatively fi nely tuned.From a more systematic perspective on nervous system organization, the spinal cord and brainstem generate a continuous series of spinal and cranial nerves, respectively. The human spinal cord, roughly as thick as an adults little fi nger, is ultimately surrounded and protected by the vertebral column, whereas the skull protects the brain. In cross-section, the spinal cords two basic types of nervous tissue are obvious: gray matter and white matter. Gray matter forms an H-shaped region surrounding the central canal and consists mainly of neuronal cell bodies and neuropil. White matter surrounds gray matter in the spinal cord and consists mostly of axons collected into overlapping fi ber bundles. Many axons have a myelin sheath, a uniquely vertebrate feature allowing rapid nerve impulse conduction and giving white matter its pale appearance.The spinal cord looks segmented because bilateral pairs of dorsal and ventral roots emerge regularly along its length. These pairs form fi ve sets: cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal. In humans there are typically 31 spinal nerve pairs that are named according to the intervertebral foramen they pass through. This enumeration varies between species.Based on human brain macroscopic dissection, Samuel Thomas von Smmerring in 1778 recognized a sequence of 12 cranial nerve pairs, and this classifi cation scheme remains traditional for vertebrates in general, although it is problematic in terms of completeness and nonconformance with contemporary fate maps of cranial nerve nucleus development. In any event, cranial nerves are more heterogeneous functionally than spinal nerves, and indeed most cranial nerve pairs have distinct compositions in terms of fi ber types.In humans, seven cranial nerves transmit information about the so-called special senses associated with the head: olfaction, vision, hearing and balance, and taste. Nerves III, IV, and VI primarily control conjugate eye movements, although the third nerve also mediates autonomic control of the pupillary light refl ex and lens accommodation. Major parts of the trigeminal nerve carry sensory axons from the face and motor axons innervating the muscles of mastication. The facial nerve controls the muscles of facial expression and also innervates the salivary and lacrimal glands-its role in emotional expression is obvious. The glossopharyngeal nerve innervates the pharynx and mediates the swallowing refl ex. The vagus nerve has an exceptionally complex and widespread innervation pattern, including laryngeal muscles producing speech, and the parasympathetic innervation of most thoracic and abdominal viscera. The spinal accessory nerve innervates several muscles that stabilize the head and neck and the hypoglossal nerve innervates the tongue musculature.Macroscopically the mammalian cerebrospinal trunk has two great expansions-the cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum-and both have an outer laminated cortex surrounding deep nonlaminated nuclei. The most extraordinary growth of the mammalian brain occurs in the endbrain or cerebral hemispheres These lobes are only crude guides to the cerebrums functional organization. Over the last 150 years progressively better analysis has parceled the cortical mantle into a mosaic of roughly 50 to 100 areas with more or less distinct structural and functional characteristics. The most famous and enduring cortical regionalization maps were generated by Korbinian Brodmann a century ago Most cerebral cortical areas directly modulate activity on the opposite side of the body through descending pathways that cross the midline to reach motor system parts in the contralateral CNS. Furthermore, axon bundles called commissures connect cerebral cortical areas of one hemisphere with the same or related areas of the opposite hemisphereand different areas in the same hemisphere are interconnected through complex association pathways. Thus, commissural and association pathways allow comparison and integration of information between cortical areas within and between the cerebral hemispheres. Communication between hemispheres is eliminated by commissurotomy, the surgical division of all cerebral commissures. This procedure sometimes is used to treat otherwise intractable epilepsy cases, preventing spread of severe epileptic activity from one hemisphere to the other. Incredibly, commissurotomy patients function very well most of the time, and behavioral studies on such "split brain" patients have yielded remarkable information about cerebral cortical organization The CNS is completely surrounded by three concentric connective tissue membranes: pia, arachnoid, and dura. The pia is a very thin, vascular membrane. As the name suggests, it adheres closely to the CNSs surface, even where there are deep invaginations, as in the cerebral and cerebellar cortex. Then comes the arachnoid, which has a tenuous, web-like structure but is histologically similar to pia. Finally, the dura is a thick, inelastic covering apposed to the skull and vertebral canals inner surface. Membranes covering the CNS are continuous with similar coverings of the PNS, where the terminology differs.In certain CNS regions neural tissue is absent but meninges persist. Here, ependymal cells lining the ventricular system fuse with the pia and arachnoid layers to form structures known as choroid plexus, which contains abundant blood vessels and serves as a component of the blood-brain barrier. The choroid plexus produces CSF in the roof of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles, and this fl uid fi lls the brain ventricles, and perhaps at least part of the spinal central canal. Under positive hydrostatic pressure, CSF passes out of the brains interior through three foramina in the fourth ventricles roof, to fi ll the subarachnoid space between pia and arachnoid.The human brain consumes about 20% of the bodys oxygen supply at rest, even though it usually weighs only about a kilogram. Thus, the brain must continuously receive a voluminous blood supply, on the order of a liter per minute. Blood reaches the brain through two arterial roots-vertebral and internal carotid arteries-that anastomose in the circle of Willis, which essentially surrounds the base of the hypothalamus and pituitary glands stalk. The functional importance of this arterial circle cannot be overemphasized because afterward there is a drastic reduction in anastomoses between brain arteries and arterioles within brain tissue itself. As a result, blockage or rupture of even a small artery or arteriole rapidly deprives the supplied brain region of oxygen, causing a stroke or brain attack.After entering the skull through the foramen magnum with the spinal cord, the paired vertebral arteries fuse into a single basilar artery, generating the cerebellar arteries and the posterior cerebral arteries, which supply occipital cerebral regions. The internal carotid arteries divide to form the anterior and middle cerebral arteries the former supplies each hemispheres medial surface, and the latter supplies the rest of the hemisphere. By and large, the major arteries course along the cerebral surface and branches dive abruptly into the brain and proliferate into arterioles and capillaries.A system of large venous sinuses collect blood from brain capillaries and return it to the heart, mostly via the paired internal jugular veins. The major venous sinuses lie within the dura, whose inelasticity essentially holds the sinuses open. Blood fl ow through sinuses is slow and under low hydrostatic pressure. Thin-walled venous sinuses surrounded by the tough and immovable dura sets the stage for serious injury when the head is subjected to physical trauma. A wellknown example is traumatic injury to the great cerebral vein in the midline that can occur when a boxer is struck in the head. The blows impact causes the brain to recoil in its CSF cushion, exerting a shearing force against the dura, which remains attached to the skull. This force effectively ruptures the great cerebral vein, leading to serious hemorrhage of venous blood into the subdural space between dura and arachnoid.This chapter reviews common approaches to the problem of understanding the nervous systems fundamental structure and wiring diagram-the basic plan or architecture. One approach examines a series of increasingly complex animals from an evolutionary perspective to gain insight into basic organizing principles. It reveals trends toward centralization, cephalization, bilateral symmetry, and regionalization of the nervous system. It also suggests that basic molecular and cellular mechanisms of neuronal function, including electrical signal propagation and neurotransmitter release, have changed little since the appearance of the simplest nervous systems in hydra, jellyfi sh, and other cnidarians.Another approach follows the vertebrate nervous systems development from embryo to adult. At early developmental stages the CNS of all vertebrates has the same basic structure. A polarized, bilaterally symmetrical, regionalized neural plate of ectodermal origin invaginates to form a neural tube whose rostral half presents three swellings, followed by a caudal presumptive spinal cord. These four basic CNS divisions, arranged from rostral to caudal, go on to subdivide repeatedly until all laminated and nuclear neuron groups of the adult CNS are formed. A topographic, "geographic," or regional account of the CNS emerges from this developmental approach.How the CNSs functional systems or circuitry are arranged into a unifi ed whole is a tantalizing, deep, unsolved problem. The model discussed here equates behavior with motor output, which is driven by a combination of sensory, intrinsic behavioral state, and cognitive inputs-as well as by endogenous neuronal activity within each system. Future behavior is determined partly by sensory feedback related to the original behaviors consequences. As this is written, the relationship between CNS macroregionalization and functional systems Several types of cellular elements are integrated to constitute normally functioning brain tissue. The neuron is the communicating cell, and many neuronal subtypes are connected to one another via complex circuitries, usually involving multiple synaptic connections. Neuronal physiology is supported and maintained by neuroglial cells, which have highly diverse and incompletely understood functions. These include myelination, secretion of trophic factors, maintenance of the extracellular milieu, and scavenging of molecular and cellular debris from it. Neuroglial cells also participate in the formation and maintenance of the blood-brain barrier, a multicomponent structure that is interposed between the circulatory system and the brain substance and that serves as the molecular gateway to brain tissue.The neuron is a highly specialized cell type and is the essential cellular element in the CNS. All neurological processes are dependent on complex cell-cell interactions among single neurons as well as groups of related neurons. Neurons can be categorized according to their size, shape, neurochemical characteristics, location, and connectivity, which are important determinants of that particular functional role of the neuron in the brain. More importantly, neurons form circuits, and these circuits constitute the structural basis for brain function. Macrocircuits involve a population of neurons projecting from one brain region to another region, and microcircuits refl ect the local cell-cell interactions within a brain region. The detailed analysis of these macro-and microcircuits is an essential step in understanding the neuronal basis of a given cortical function in the healthy and the diseased brain. Thus, these cellular characteristics allow us to appreciate the special structural and biochemical qualities of a neuron in relation to its neighbors and to place it in the context of a specifi c neuronal subset, circuit, or function.Broadly speaking, therefore, there are fi ve general categories of neurons: inhibitory neurons that make local contacts, inhibitory neurons that make distant contacts, excitatory neurons that make local contacts, excitatory neurons that make distant contacts, and neuromodulatory neurons that infl uence neurotransmission, often at large distances. Within these general classes, the structural variation of neurons is systematic, and careful analyses of the anatomic features of neurons have led to various categorizations and to the development of the concept of cell type. The grouping of neurons into descriptive cell types allows the analysis of populations of neurons and the linking of specifi ed cellular characteristics with certain functional roles.Neurons are highly polarized cells, meaning that they develop distinct subcellular domains that subserve different functions. Morphologically, in a typical neuron, three major regions can be defi ned: the cell Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition body, which contains the nucleus and the major cytoplasmic organelles a variable number of dendrites, which emanate from the perikaryon and ramify over a certain volume of gray matter and which differ in size and shape, depending on the neuronal type and a single axon, which extends, in most cases, much farther from the cell body than the dendritic arbor The cell body and dendrites are the two major domains of the cell that receive inputs, and dendrites play a critically important role in providing a massive receptive area on the neuronal surface. In addition, there is a characteristic shape for each dendritic arbor, which can be used to classify neurons into morphological types. Both the structure of the dendritic arbor and the distribution of axonal terminal ramifi cations confer a high level of subcellular specifi city in the localization of particular synaptic contacts on a given neuron. The three-dimensional distribution of dendritic arborization is also important with respect to the type of information transferred to the neuron. A neuron with a dendritic tree restricted to a particular cortical layer may receive a very limited pool of afferents, whereas the widely expanded dendritic arborizations of a large pyramidal neuron will receive highly diversifi ed inputs within the different cortical layers in which segments of the dendritic tree are present An important specialization of the dendritic arbor of certain neurons is the presence of large numbers of dendritic spines, which are membranous protrusions. They are abundant in large pyramidal neurons and are much sparser on the dendrites of interneurons.The perikaryon contains the nucleus and a variety of cytoplasmic organelles. Stacks of rough endoplasmic reticulum are conspicuous in large neurons and, when interposed with arrays of free polyribosomes, are referred to as Nissl substance. Another feature of the perikaryal cytoplasm is the presence of a rich cytoskeleton composed primarily of neurofi laments and  microtubules, discussed in detail in Chapter 4. These cytoskeletal elements are dispersed in bundles that extend from the soma into the axon and dendrites.Whereas dendrites and the cell body can be characterized as domains of the neuron that receive afferents, the axon, at the other pole of the neuron, is responsible for transmitting neural information. This information may be primary, in the case of a sensory receptor, or processed information that has already been modifi ed through a series of integrative steps. The morphology of the axon and its course through the nervous system are correlated with the type of information processed by the particular neuron and by its connectivity patterns with other neurons. The axon leaves the cell body from a small swelling called the axon hillock. This structure is particularly apparent in large pyramidal neurons in other cell types, the axon sometimes emerges from one of the main dendrites. At the axon hillock, microtubules are packed into bundles that enter the axon as parallel fascicles. The axon hillock is the part of the neuron where the action potential is generated. The axon is generally unmyelinated in local circuit neurons, but it is myelinated in neurons that furnish connections between different parts of the nervous system. Axons usually have higher numbers of neurofi laments than dendrites, although this distinction can be diffi cult to make in small elements that contain fewer neurofi laments. In addition, the axon may show extensive, spatially constrained ramifi ed, as in certain local circuit neurons it may give out a large number of recurrent collaterals, as in neurons connecting different cortical regions or it may be relatively straight in the case of projections to subcortical centers, as in cortical motor neurons that send their very long axons to the ventral horn of the spinal cord. At the interface of axon terminals with target cells are the synapses, which represent specialized zones of contact consisting of a presynaptic element, a narrow synaptic cleft, and a postsynaptic element on a dendrite or perikaryon.Each synapse is a complex of several components: a presynaptic element, a cleft, and a postsynaptic element. The presynaptic element is a specialized part of the presynaptic neurons axon, the postsynaptic element is a specialized part of the postsynaptic somatodendritic membrane, and the space between these two closely apposed elements is the cleft. The portion of the axon that participates in the axon is the bouton, and it is identifi ed by the presence of synaptic vesicles and a presynaptic thickening at the active zone In cross-section on electron micrographs, a synapse looks like two parallel lines separated by a very narrow space The portion of the presynaptic element that is apposed to the postsynaptic element is the active zone. This is the region where the synaptic vesicles are concentrated, and where at any time, a small number of vesicles are docked, and presumably ready for fusion. The active zone is also enriched with voltage gated calcium channels, which are necessary to permit activity-dependent fusion and neurotrans-mitter release.The synaptic cleft is truly a space, but its properties are essential. The width of the cleft is critical because it defi nes the volume in which each vesicle releases its contents, and therefore, the peak concentration of neurotransmitter upon release. On the fl anks of the synapse, the cleft is spanned by adhesion molecules, which are believed to stabilize the cleft.The postsynaptic element may be a portion of a soma or a dendrite, or rarely, part of an axon. In the cerebral cortex, most Grays type 1 synapses are located on somata or dendritic shafts, and most Grays type 2 synapses are located on dendritic spines, which are specialized protrusions of the dendrite. A similar segregation is seen in cerebellar cortex. In nonspiny neurons, symmetric and asymmetric synapses are often less well separated. Irrespective of location, a postsynaptic thickening marks the postsynaptic element. In Grays type 2 synapses, the postsynaptic thickening is greatly enhanced. Among the molecules that are associated with the PSD are neurotransmitter receptors and molecules with less obvious function, such as PSD-95.Spines are protrusions on the dendritic shafts of some types of neurons and are the sites of synaptic contacts, usually excitatory. Use of the silver impregnation techniques of Golgi or of the methylene blue used by Ehrlich in the late nineteenth century led to the discovery of spiny appendages on dendrites of a variety of neurons. The best known are those on pyramidal neurons and Purkinje cells, although spines occur on neuron types at all levels of the central nervous system. In 1896, Berkley observed that terminal axonal boutons were closely apposed to spines and suggested that spines may be involved in conducting impulses from neuron to neuron. In 1904, Santiago Ramn y Cajal suggested that spines could collect the electrical charge resulting from neuronal activity. He also noted that spines substantially increase the receptive surface of the dendritic arbor, which may represent an important factor in receiving the contacts made by the axonal terminals of other neurons. It has been calculated that the approximately 20,000 spines of a pyramidal neuron account for more than 40% of its total surface area .More recent analyses of spine electrical properties have demonstrated that spines are dynamic structures that can regulate many neurochemical events related to synaptic transmission and modulate synaptic efficacy. Spines are also known to undergo pathologic alterations and have a reduced density in a number of experimental manipulations and in many developmental, neurologic, and psychiatric conditions. Morphologically, spines are characterized by a narrower portion emanating from the dendritic shaft, the neck, and an ovoid bulb or head, although spine morphology may vary from large mushroom-shaped bulbs to small bulges barely discernable on the surface of the dendrite. Spines have an average length of 2 mm, but there is considerable variability in their dimensions. At the ultrastructural level A large variety of inhibitory interneuron types is present in the cerebral cortex and in subcortical structures. These neurons contain the inhibitory neurotransmitter g-aminobutyric acid and exert strong local inhibitory effects. Their dendritic and axonal arborizations offer important clues as to their role in the regulation of pyramidal cell function. In addition, for several GABAergic interneurons, a subtype of a given morphologic class can be defi ned further by a particular set of neurochemical characteristics. Interneurons have been extensively characterized in the neocortex and hippocampus of rodents and primates, but they are present throughout the cerebral gray matter and exhibit a rich variety of morphologies, depending on the brain region, as well as on the species studied.In the neocortex and hippocampus, the targets and morphologies of interneuron axons is most useful to classify them into morphological and functional groups. For example, basket cells have axonal endings surrounding pyramidal cell somata  and provide most of the inhibitory GABAergic synapses to the somas and proximal dendrites of pyramidal cells. These cells are also characterized by certain biochemical features in that the majority of them contain the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin, and cholecystokinin appears to be the most likely neuropeptide in large basket cells.Chandelier cells have spatially restricted axon terminals that look like vertically oriented "cartridges," each consisting of a series of axonal boutons, or swellings, linked together by thin connecting pieces. These neurons synapse exclusively on the axon initial segment of pyramidal cells, and because the strength of the synaptic input is correlated directly with its proximity to the axon initial segment, there can be no more powerful inhibitory input to a pyramidal cell than that of the chandelier cell The double bouquet cells are characterized by a vertical bitufted dendritic tree and a tight bundle of vertically oriented varicose axon collaterals These neurons are unique to the striatum, a part of the basal ganglia that comprises the caudate nucleus and putamen. Medium-sized spiny cells are scattered throughout the caudate nucleus and putamen and are recognized by their relatively large size, compared with other cellular elements of the basal ganglia, and by the fact that they are generally isolated neurons. They differ from all others in the striatum in that they have a highly ramifi ed dendritic arborization radiating in all directions and densely covered with spines. They furnish a major output from the caudate nucleus and putamen and receive a highly diverse input from, among other sources, the cerebral cortex, thalamus, and certain dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra. These neurons are neurochemically quite heterogeneous, contain GABA, and may contain several neuropeptides and the calcium-binding protein calbindin. In Huntington disease, a neurodegenerative disorder of the striatum characterized by involuntary movements and progressive dementia, an early and dramatic loss of medium-sized spiny cells occurs.Purkinje cells are the most salient cellular elements of the cerebellar cortex. They are arranged in a single row throughout the entire cerebellar cortex between the molecular layer and the granular layer. They are among the largest neurons and have a round perikaryon, classically described as shaped "like a chianti bottle," with a highly branched dendritic tree shaped like a candelabrum and extending into the molecular layer where they are contacted by incoming systems of afferent fi bers from granule neurons and the brainstem. The apical dendrites of Purkinje cells have an enormous number of spines. A particular feature of the dendritic tree of the Purkinje cell is that it is distributed in one plane, perpendicular to the longitudinal axes of the cerebellar folds, and each dendritic arbor determines a separate domain of cerebellar cortex Spiny stellate cells are small multipolar neurons with local dendritic and axonal arborizations. These neurons resemble pyramidal cells in that they are the only other cortical neurons with large numbers of dendritic spines, but they differ from pyramidal neurons in that they lack an elaborate apical dendrite. The relatively restricted dendritic arbor of these neurons is presumably a manifestation of the fact that they are high-resolution neurons that gather afferents to a very restricted region of the cortex. Dendrites rarely leave the layer in which the cell body resides. The spiny stellate cell also resembles the pyramidal cell in that it provides asymmetric synapses that are presumed to be excitatory, and is thought to use glutamate as its neurotransmitter The axons of spiny stellate neurons have primarily intracortical targets and a radial orientation, and appear to play an important role in forming links among layer IV, the major thalamorecipient layer, and layers III, V, and VI, the major projection layers. The spiny stellate neuron appears to function as a highfi delity relay of thalamic inputs, maintaining strict topographic organization and setting up initial vertical links of information transfer within a given cortical area All cortical output is carried by pyramidal neurons, and the intrinsic activity of the neocortex can be viewed simply as a means of fi nely tuning their output. A pyramidal cell is a highly polarized neuron, with a major orientation axis perpendicular to the pial surface of the cerebral cortex. In cross-section, the cell body is roughly triangular In most cases, the axon of a large pyramidal cell extends from the base of the perikaryon and courses toward the subcortical white matter, giving off several collateral branches that are directed to cortical domains generally located within the vicinity of the cell of origin. Typically, a pyramidal cell has a large nucleus, and a cytoplasmic rim that contains, particularly in large pyramidal cells, a collection of granular material chiefl y composed of lipofuscin. Although all pyramidal cells possess these general features, they can also be subdivided into numerous classes based on their morphology, laminar location, and connectivity with cortical and subcortical regions Motor cells of the ventral horns of the spinal cord, also called a motoneurons, have their cell bodies within the spinal cord and send their axons outside the central nervous system to innervate the muscles. Different types of motor neurons are distinguished by their targets. The a motoneurons innervate skeletal muscles, but smaller motor neurons innervate the spindle organs of the muscles. The a motor neurons are some of the largest neurons in the entire central nervous system and are characterized by a multipolar perikaryon and a very rich cytoplasm that renders them very conspicuous on histological preparations. They have a large number of spiny dendrites that arborize locally within the ventral horn. The a motoneuron axon leaves the central nervous system through the ventral root of the peripheral nerves. Their distribution in the ventral horn is not random and corresponds to a somatotopic representation of the muscle groups of the limbs and axial musculature Dopaminergic neurons are large neurons that reside mostly within the pars compacta of the substantia nigra and in the ventral tegmental area The term neuroglia, or "nerve glue," was coined in 1859 by Rudolph Virchow, who conceived of the neuroglia as an inactive "connective tissue" holding neurons together in the central nervous system. The metallic staining techniques developed by Ramn y Cajal and del Rio-Hortega allowed these two great pioneers to distinguish, in addition to the ependyma lining the ventricles and central canal, three types of supporting cells in the CNS: oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and microglia. In the peripheral nervous system, the Schwann cell is the major neuroglial component.Most brain functions depend on rapid communication between circuits of neurons. As shown in depth later, there is a practical limit to how fast an individual bare axon can conduct an action potential. Organisms developed two solutions for enhancing rapid communication between neurons and their effector organs. In invertebrates, the diameters of axons are enlarged. In vertebrates, the myelin sheath Axon enlargement accelerates action potential propagation in proportion to the square root of axonal diameter. Thus larger axons conduct faster than small ones, but substantial increases in conduction velocity require huge axons. The largest axon in the invertebrate kingdom is the squid giant axon, which is about the thickness of a mechanical pencil lead. This axon  conducts the action potential at speeds of 10 to 20 ms. As the axon mediates an escape refl ex, fi ring must be rapid if the animal is to survive. Bare axons and continuous conduction obviously provide suffi cient rates of signal propagation for even very large invertebrates, and many human axons also remain bare. However, in the human brain with 10 billion neurons, axons cannot be as thick as pencil lead, otherwise heads would weigh one hundred pounds or more.Thus, along the invertebrate evolutionary line, the use of bare axons imposes a natural, insurmountable limit-a constraint of axonal size-to increasing the processing capacity of the nervous system. Vertebrates, however, get around this problem through evolution of the myelin sheath, which allows 10-to 100-fold increases in conduction of the nerve impulse along axons with fairly minute diameters.In the central nervous system, myelin sheaths Because the brain and spinal cord are encased in the bony skull and vertebrae, CNS evolution has promoted compactness among the supporting cells of the CNS. Each oligodendrocyte cell body is responsible for the construction and maintenance of several myelin sheaths Peripheral nerves pass between moving muscles and around major joints, and are routinely exposed to physical trauma. A hard tackle, slipping on an icy sidewalk, or even just occupying the same uncomfortable seating posture for too long, can painfully compress peripheral nerves and potentially damage them. Thus, evolutionary pressures shaping the PNS favor robustness and regeneration rather than conservation of space. Myelin in the PNS is generated by Schwann cells The major integral membrane protein of peripheral nerve myelin is protein zero, a member of a very large family of proteins termed the immunoglobulin gene superfamily. This protein makes up about 80% of the protein complement of PNS myelin. Interactions between the extracellular domains of P0 molecules expressed on one layer of the myelin sheath with those of the apposing layer yield a characteristic regular periodicity that can be seen by thin section electron microscopy Curiously, P0 is present in the CNS of lower vertebrates such as sharks and bony fi sh, but in terrestrial vertebrates, P0 is limited to the PNS. CNS myelin compaction in these higher organisms is subserved by proteolipid protein and its alternate splice form, DM-20. These two proteins are generated from the same gene, both span the plasma membrane four times, and differ only in that PLP has a small, positively charged segment exposed on the cytoplasmic surface. Why did PLPDM-20 replace P0 in CNS myelin Manipulation of PLP and P0 in CNS myelin established an axonotrophic function for PLP in CNS myelin. Removal of PLP from rodent CNS myelin altered the periodicity of compact myelin and produced a late onset axonal degeneration Myelin membranes also contain a number of other proteins such as the myelin basic protein, which is a major CNS myelin component, and PMP-22, a protein that is involved in a form of peripheral nerve disease. A large number of naturally occurring gene mutations can affect the proteins specifi c to the myelin sheath and cause neurological disease. In animals, these mutations have been named according to the phenotype that is produced: the shiverer mouse, the shaking pup, the rumpshaker mouse, the jumpy mouse, the myelindefi cient rat, the quaking mouse, and so forth. Many of these mutations are well characterized, and have provided valuable insights into the role of individual proteins in myelin formation and axonal survival.As the name suggests, astrocytes were fi rst described as star-shaped, process-bearing cells distributed throughout the central nervous system. They constitute from 20 to 50% of the volume of most brain areas. Astrocytes appear stellate when stained using reagents that highlight their intermediate fi laments, but have complex morphologies when their entire cytoplasm is visualized. The two main forms, protoplasmic and fi brous astrocytes, predominate in gray and white matter, respectively Astrocytes "fence in" neurons and oligodendrocytes. Astrocytes achieve this isolation of the brain parenchyma by extending long processes projecting to the pia mater and the ependyma to form the glia limitans, by covering the surface of capillaries, and by making a cuff around the nodes of Ranvier. They also ensheath synapses and dendrites and project processes to cell somas For a long time, astrocytes were thought to physically form the blood-brain barrier, which prevents the entry of cells and diffusion of molecules into the CNS. In fact, astrocytes are indeed the blood-brain barrier in lower species. However, in higher species, astrocytes are responsible for inducing and maintaining the tight junctions in endothelial cells that effectively form the barrier. Astrocytes also take part in angiogenesis, which may be important in the development and repair of the CNS. Their role in this important process is still poorly understood.There is strong evidence for the role of radial glia and astrocytes in the migration and guidance of neurons in early development. Astrocytes are a major source of extracellular matrix proteins and adhesion molecules in the CNS examples are nerve cell-nerve cell adhesion molecule, laminin, fi bronectin, cytotactin, and the J-1 family members janusin and tenascin. These molecules participate not only in the migration of neurons, but also in the formation of neuronal aggregates, so-called nuclei, as well as networks.Astrocytes produce, in vivo and in vitro, a very large number of growth factors. These factors act singly or in combination to selectively regulate the morphology, proliferation, differentiation, or survival, or all four, of distinct neuronal subpopulations. Most of the growth factors also act in a specifi c manner on the development and functions of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. The production of growth factors and cytokines by astrocytes and their responsiveness to these factors is a major mechanism underlying the developmental function and regenerative capacity of the CNS. During neurotransmission, neurotransmitters and ions are released at high concentration in the synaptic cleft. The rapid removal of these substances is important so that they do not interfere with future synaptic activity. The presence of astrocyte processes around synapses positions them well to regulate neurotransmitter uptake and inactivation In a variety of CNS disorders-neurotoxicity, viral infections, neurodegenerative disorders, HIV, AIDS, dementia, multiple sclerosis, infl ammation, and trauma-astrocytes react by becoming hypertrophic and, in a few cases, hyperplastic. A rapid and huge upregulation of GFAP expression and fi lament formation is associated with astrogliosis. The formation of reactive astrocytes can spread very far from the site of origin. For instance, a localized trauma can recruit astrocytes from as far as the contralateral side, suggesting the existence of soluble factors in the mediation process. Tumor necrosis factor and ciliary neurotrophic factors have been identifi ed as key factors in astrogliosis.The glutamate-glutamine cycle is an example of a complex mechanism that involves an active coupling of neurotransmitter metabolism between neurons and astrocytes. The systems of exchange of glutamine, glutamate, GABA, and ammonia between neurons and astrocytes are highly integrated. The postulated detoxifi cation of ammonia and the inactivation of glutamate and GABA by astrocytes are consistent with the exclusive localization of glutamine synthetase in the astroglial compartment. FIGURE 3.10 Astrocytes are depicted in situ in schematic relationship with other cell types with which they are known to interact. Astrocytes send processes that surround neurons and synapses, blood vessels, and the region of the node of Ranvier and extend to the ependyma, as well as to the pia mater, where they form the glial limitans.The brain traditionally has been considered an "immunologically privileged site," mainly because the blood-brain barrier normally restricts the access of immune cells from the blood. However, it is now known that immunological reactions do take place in the central nervous system, particularly during cerebral infl ammation. Microglial cells have been termed the tissue macrophages of the CNS, and they function as the resident representatives of the immune system in the brain. A rapidly expanding literature describes microglia as major players in CNS development and in the pathogenesis of CNS disease.The fi rst description of microglial cells can be traced to Franz Nissl, who used the term "rod cell" to describe a population of glial cells that reacted to brain pathology. He postulated that rod-cell function was similar to that of leukocytes in other organs. Cajal described microglia as part of his "third element" of the CNS-cells that he considered to be of mesodermal origin and distinct from neurons and astrocytes Del On the basis of current knowledge, it appears that most ramifi ed microglial cells are derived from bone marrow-derived monocytes, which enter the brain parenchyma during early stages of brain development. These cells help phagocytose degenerating cells that undergo programmed cell death as part of normal development. They retain the ability to divide and have the immunophenotypic properties of monocytes and macrophages. In addition to their role in remodeling the CNS during early development, microglia secrete cytokines and growth factors that are important in fi ber tract development, gliogenesis, and angiogenesis. They are also the major CNS cells involved in presenting antigens to T lymphocytes. After the early stages of development, ameboid microglia transform into the ramifi ed microglia that persist throughout adulthood Little is known about microglial function in the healthy adult vertebrate CNS. Microglia constitute a formidable percentage of the total cells in the mouse brain. Microglia are found in all regions of the brain, and there are more in gray than in white matter. The neocortex and hippocampus have more microglia than regions like the brainstem or cerebellum. Species variations also have been noted, as human white matter has three times more microglia than rodent white matter.Microglia usually have small rod-shaped somas from which numerous processes extend in a rather symmetrical fashion. Processes from different microglia rarely overlap or touch, and specialized contacts between microglia and other cells have not been described in the normal brain. Although each microglial cell occupies its own territory, microglia collectively form a network that covers much of the CNS parenchyma. Because of the numerous processes, microglia present extensive surface membrane to the CNS environment. Regional variation in the number and shape of microglia in the adult brain suggests that local environmental cues can affect microglial distribution and morphology. On the basis of these morphological observations, it is likely that microglia play a role in tissue homeostasis. The nature of this homeostasis remains to be elucidated. It is clear, however, that microglia can respond quickly and dramatically to alterations in the CNS microenvironment."Reactive" microglia can be distinguished from resting microglia by two criteria: change in morphology and upregulation of monocytemacrophage molecules Blood vessels form an extremely rich network in the central nervous system, particularly in the cerebral cortex and subcortical gray masses, whereas the white matter is less densely vascularized Capillaries of the central nervous system form a protective barrier that restricts the exchange of solutes between blood and brain. This distinct function of brain capillaries is called the blood-brain barrier A fundamental difference between brain endothelial cells and those of the systemic circulation is the presence in brain of interendothelial tight junctions, also known as zonula occludens. In the systemic circulation, the interendothelial space serves as a diffusion pathway that offers little resistance to most blood solutes entering the surrounding tissues. In contrast, blood-brain barrier tight junctions effectively restrict FIGURE 3.14 Human cerebral capillary obtained at biopsy. Blood-brain barrier capillaries are characterized by the paucity of transcytotic vesicles in endothelial cells, a high mitochondrial content, and the formation of tight junctions between endothelial cells that restrict the transport of solutes through the interendothelial space. The capillary endothelium is encased within a basement membrane, which also houses pericytes. Outside the basement membrane are astrocyte foot processes, which may be responsible for the induction of BBB characteristics on the endothelial cells. L, lumen of the capillary. Scale bar  1 mm. From Another characteristic of endothelial cells of the brain is their low transcytotic activity. Brain endothelium, therefore, is by this index not very permeable. It is of interest that certain regions of the brain, such as the area postrema and periventricular organs, lack a blood-brain barrier. In these regions, the perivascular space is in direct contact with the nervous tissue, and endothelial cells are fenestrated and show many pinocytotic vesicles. In these brain regions, neurons are known to secrete hormones and other factors that require rapid and uninhibited access to the systemic circulation.Because of the high metabolic requirements of the brain, blood-brain barrier endothelial cells must have transport mechanisms for the specifi c nutrients needed for proper brain function. One such mechanism is glucose transporter isoform 1, which is expressed asymmetrically on the surface of bloodbrain barrier endothelial cells. In Alzheimers disease, the expression of GLUT-1 on brain endothelial cells is reduced. This reduction may be due to a lower metabolic requirement of the brain after extensive neuronal loss. Other specifi c transport mechanisms on the cerebral endothelium include the large neutral amino acid carrier-mediated system that transports, among other amino acids, l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine, used as a therapeutic agent in Parkinson disease. Also on the surface of blood-brain barrier endothelial cells are transferrin receptors that allow the transport of iron into specifi c areas of the brain. The amount of iron that is transported into the various areas of the brain appears to depend on the concentration of transferrin receptors on the surface of endothelial cells of that region. Thus, the transport of specifi c nutrients into the brain is regulated during physiological and pathological conditions by blood-brain barrier transport proteins distributed according to the regional and metabolic requirements of brain tissue.In general, disruption of the blood-brain barrier causes perivascular or vasogenic edema, which is the accumulation of fl uids from the blood around the blood vessels of the brain. This is one of the main features of multiple sclerosis. In multiple sclerosis, infl ammatory cells, primarily T cells and macrophages, invade the brain by migrating through the bloodbrain barrier and attack cerebral elements as if these elements were foreign antigens. It has been observed by many investigators that the degree of edema accumulation causes the neurological symptoms experienced by people suffering from multiple sclerosis.Studying the regulation of blood-brain barrier permeability is important for several reasons. Therapeutic treatments for neurological disease need to be able to cross the barrier. Attempts to design drug delivery systems that take therapeutic drugs directly into the brain have been made by using chemically engineered carrier molecules that take advantage of receptors such as that for transferrin, which normally transports iron into the brain. Development of an in vitro test system of the blood-brain barrier is of importance in the creation of new neurotropic drugs that are targeted to the brain.Cells have many features in common, but each cell type also possesses a functional architecture related to its unique physiology. In fact, cells may become so specialized in fulfi lling a particular function that virtually all cellular components may be devoted to it. For example, the machinery inside mammalian erythrocytes is completely dedicated to the delivery of oxygen to the tissues and the removal of carbon dioxide. Toward this end, this cell has evolved a specialized plasma membrane, an underlying cytoskeletal matrix that molds the cell into a biconcave disk, and a cytoplasm rich in hemoglobin. Modification of the cell machinery extends even to the discarding of structures such as the nucleus and the protein synthetic apparatus, which are not needed after the red blood cell matures. In many respects, the terminally differentiated, highly specialized cells of the nervous system exhibit comparable commitment-the extensive development of subcellular components refl ects the roles that each plays.The neuron serves as the cellular correlate of information processing and, in aggregate, all neurons act together to integrate responses of the entire organism to the external world. It is therefore not surprising that the specializations found in neurons are more diverse and complex than those found in any other cell type. Single neurons commonly interact in specific ways with hundreds of other cells-other neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, immune cells, muscle, and glandular cells. This chapter defi nes the major functional domains of the neuron, describes the subcellular elements that compose the building blocks of these domains, and examines the processes that create and maintain neuronal functional architecture.Neural cells are remarkably complex . As discussed in Chapter 3, the perikaryon, or cell body, contains the nucleus and the protein synthetic machinery. In neurons, nuclei are large and contain a preponderance of euchromatin. Because protein synthesis must be kept at a high level just to maintain the neuronal extensions, transcription levels in neurons are generally high. In turn, the variety of different polypeptides associated with cellular domains in a neuron requires that many different genes be transcribed constantly.As mRNAs are synthesized, they move from the nucleus into a protein-synthesizing region termed the "translational cytoplasm," comprising cytoplasmic and membrane-associated polysomes, the intermediate compartment of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, and the Golgi complex. Neurons have relatively large amounts of translational cytoplasm to accommodate high levels of protein synthesis. This protein synthetic machinery is arranged in discrete intracellular "granules," termed Nissl substance after the histologist who fi rst discovered these structures in the nineteenth century. The Nissl substance is actually a combination of stacks of rough endoplasmic reticulum, interposed with rosettes of free polysomes. This arrangement is unique to neurons, and its functional signifi cance remains unknown. Most, but not all proteins used by the neuron are synthesized in the perikaryon. During or after synthesis and processing, proteins are packaged into membrane-limited organelles, incorporated into cytoskeletal elements, or remain as soluble constituents of the cytoplasm. After packaging, membrane proteins are transported to their sites of function.In general, neurons have two discrete functional domains, the axonal and somatodendritic compartments, each of which encompasses a number of microdomains The axon is the first neuronal process to differentiate during development. A typical neuron has only a single axon that proceeds some distance from the cell body before branching extensively. Usually the longest process of a neuron, axons come in many sizes. In a human adult, axons range in length from a few micrometers for small interneurons to a meter or more for large motor neurons, and they may be even longer in large animals. In mammals and other vertebrates, the longest axons generally extend approximately half the body length.Axonal diameters also are quite variable, ranging from 0.1 to 20 mm for large myelinated fibers in vertebrates. Invertebrate axons grow to even larger diameters, with the giant axons of some squid species achieving diameters in the millimeter range. Invertebrate axons reach such large diameters because they lack the myelinating glia that speed conduction of the action potential. As a result, axonal caliber must be large to sustain the high rate of conduction needed for the reflexes that permit escape from predators and capture of prey. Although axonal caliber is closely regulated in both myelinated and nonmyelinated fibers, this parameter is critical for those organisms that are unable to produce myelin.The region of the neuronal cell body where the axon originates has several specialized features. This domain, called the axon hillock, is distinguished most readily by a deficiency of Nissl substance. Therefore, protein synthesis cannot take place to any appreciable degree in this region. Cytoplasm in the vicinity of the axon hillock may have a few polysomes but is dominated by the cytoskeletal and membranous organelles that are being delivered to the axon. Microtubules and neurofilaments begin to align roughly parallel to each other, helping to organize membrane-limited organelles destined for the axon. The hillock is a region where materials either are committed to the axon or are excluded from the axon. The molecular basis for this sorting is not understood. Cytoplasm in the axon hillock does not appear to contain a physical "sizing" barrier because large organelles such as mitochondria enter the axon readily, whereas only a small number of essentially excluded structures such as polysomes are occasionally seen only in the initial segment of the axon and not in the axon proper. An exception to this general rule is during development when local protein synthesis does take place at the axon terminus or growth cone. In the mature neuron, the physiological significance of this barrier must be considerable because axonal structures are found to accumulate in this region in many neuropathologies, including those due to degenerative diseases and to exposure to neurotoxic compounds.The initial segment of the axon is the region of the axon adjacent to the axon hillock. Microtubules generally form characteristic fascicles, or bundles, in the initial segment of the axon. These fascicles are not seen elsewhere. The initial segment and, to some extent, the axon hillock also have a distinctive specialized plasma membrane. Initially, the plasmalemma was thought to have a thick electrondense coating actually attached to the inner surface of the membrane, but this dense undercoating is in reality separated by 5-10 nm from the plasma membrane inner surface and has a complex ultrastructure. Neither the composition nor the function of this undercoating is known. Curiously, the undercoating is present in the same regions of the initial segment as the distinctive fasciculation of microtubules, although the relationship is not understood. The neuron consists of a soma, or cell body, in which the nucleus, multiple cytoplasm-fi lled processes termed dendrites, and the axon are placed. The neuron is highly extended in space one with a cell body of the size shown here might maintain an axon several miles in length The unique shape of each neuron is the result of a cooperative interplay between plasma membrane components and cytoskeletal elements. Most large neurons in vertebrates are myelinated by oligodendrocytes in the CNS and by Schwann cells in the PNS. The compact wraps of myelin encasing the axon distal to the initial segment permit rapid conduction of the action potential by a process termed "saltatory conduction".The plasma membrane is specialized in the initial segment and axon hillock in that it contains voltagesensitive ion channels in large numbers, and most action potentials originate in this domain. The molecular composition of the axon initial segment is very similar to that of the node of Ranvier however, evidence is growing that the mechanisms that govern the assembly of these components in the two locations are distinct.Ultimately, axonal structure is geared toward the efficient conduction of action potentials at a rate appropriate to the function of that neuron. This can be seen from both the ultrastructure and the composition of axons. Axons are roughly cylindrical in crosssection with little or no taper. As discussed later, this diameter is maintained by regulation of the cytoskeleton. Even at branch points, daughter axons are comparable in diameter to the parent axon. This constant caliber helps ensure a consistent rate of conduction. Similarly, the organization of membrane components is regulated to this end. Voltage-gated ion channels are distributed to maximize conduction. Sodium channels are distributed more or less uniformly in small nonmyelinated axons, but are concentrated at high density in the regularly spaced unmyelinated gaps, known as nodes of Ranvier. An axon so organized will conduct an action potential or train of spikes long distances with high fidelity at a defined speed. These characteristics are essential for maintaining the precise timing and coordination seen in neuronal circuits.Nodes of Ranvier in myelinated fi bers are fl anked by paranodal axoglial junctions comprised of the axolemmal proteins CasprParanodin and Contactin and the glial isoform of neurofascin, Nfasc155. There has been considerable debate about the role of axoglial junctions in assembling the node of Ranvier, but, at least in the PNS, the nodal isoform of Neurofascin, Nfasc186, seems to be the crucial molecule that allows NrCAM, beta-IV spectrin, ankyrin-G and sodium channels to form a nodal complex Most vertebrate neurons have multiple dendrites arising from their perikarya. Unlike axons, dendrites branch continuously and taper extensively with a reduction in caliber in daughter processes at each branching. In addition, the surface of dendrites is covered with small protrusions, or spines, which are postsynaptic specializations. Although the surface area of a dendritic arbor may be quite extensive, dendrites in general remain in the relative vicinity of the perikaryon. A dendritic arbor may be contacted by the axons of many different and distant neurons or innervated by a single axon making multiple synaptic contacts.The base of a dendrite is continuous with the cytoplasm of the cell body. In contrast to the axon, Nissl substance extends into dendrites, and certain proteins are synthesized predominantly in dendrites. There is evidence for the selective placement of some mRNAs in dendrites as well The shapes and complexity of dendritic arborizations may be remarkably plastic. Dendrites appear relatively late in development and initially have only limited numbers of branches and spines. As development and maturation of the nervous system proceed, the size and number of branches increase. The number of spines increases dramatically, and their distribution may change. This remodeling of synaptic connectivity may continue into adulthood, and environmental effects can alter this pattern significantly. Eventually, in the aging brain, there is a reduction in complexity and size of dendritic arbors, with fewer spines and thinner dendritic shafts. These changes correlate with changes in neuronal function during development and aging.As defined by classical physiology, axons are structural correlates for neuronal output, and dendrites constitute the domain for receiving information. A neuron without an axon or one without dendrites therefore might seem paradoxical, but such neurons do exist. Certain amacrine and horizontal cells in the vertebrate retina have no identifiable axons, although they do have dendritic processes that are morphologically distinct from axons. Such processes may have both pre-and postsynaptic specializations or may have gap junctions that act as direct electrical connections between two cells. Similarly, the pseudounipolar sensory neurons of dorsal root ganglia have no dendrites. In their mature form, these DRG sensory neurons give rise to a single axon that extends a few hundred micrometers before branching. One long branch extends to the periphery, where it may form a sensory nerve ending in muscle spindles or skin. Large DRG peripheral branches are myelinated and have the morphological characteristics of an axon, but they contain neither pre-nor postsynaptic specializations. The other branch extends into the central nervous system, where it forms synaptic contacts. In DRG neurons, the action potential is generated at distal sensory nerve endings and then is transmitted along the peripheral branch to the central branch and the appropriate central nervous system targets, bypassing the cell body. The functional and morphological hallmarks of axons and dendrites are listed in Neurons are polarized cells that are specialized for membrane and protein synthesis, as well as for conduction of the nerve impulse. In general, neurons have a cell body, a dendritic arborization that usually is located near the cell body, and an extended axon that may branch considerably before terminating to form synapses with other neurons.Both neurons and glial cells have strikingly extended morphologies. Protein and lipid components are synthesized and assembled into the membranes of these cell extensions through pathways of membrane biogenesis that have been elucidated primarily in other cell types. However, some adaptations of these general mechanisms have been necessary, due to the specific requirements of cells in the nervous system. Neurons, for example, have devised mechanisms for ensuring that the specific components of the axonal and dendritic plasma membranes are selectively delivered to each plasma membrane subdomain. With rare exceptions, each neuron has a single axon.Axons appear fi rst during neuronal differentiation.Axon initial segments are distinguished by a specialized plasma membrane containing a high density of ion channels and distinctive cytoskeletal organization.Axons typically are cylindrical in form with a round or elliptical cross-section.Large axons are myelinated in vertebrates, and the thickness of the myelin sheath is proportional to the axonal caliber.Axon caliber is a function of neurofi lament and microtubule numbers with neurofi laments predominating in large axons.Microtubules in axons have a uniform polarity with plus ends distal from the cell body.Axonal microtubules are enriched in tau protein with a characteristic phosphorylation pattern.Ribosomes are excluded from mature axons, although a few may be detectable in initial segments.Axonal branches tend to be distal from the cell body.Axonal branches form obtuse angles and have diameters similar to the parent stem.Most axons have presynaptic specializations that may be en passant or at the ends of axonal branches.Action potentials usually are generated at the axon hillock and conducted away from the cell body.Traditionally, axons are specialized for conduction and synaptic transmission, i.e., neuronal output.Most neurons have multiple dendrites arising from their cell bodies.Dendrites begin to differentiate only after the axon has formed.Dendrites are continuous with the perikaryal cytoplasm, and the transition point cannot be distinguished readily.Dendrites usually have a signifi cant taper and small spinous processes that give them an irregular cross-section.Dendrites are not myelinated, although a few wraps of myelin may occur rarely.The dendritic cytoskeleton may appear less organized, and microtubules dominate even in large dendrites.Microtubules in proximal dendrites have mixed polarity, with both plus and minus ends oriented distal to the cell body.Dendritic microtubules may contain some tau protein, but MAP2 is not present in axonal compartments and is highly enriched in dendrites.Both rough endoplasmic reticulum and cytoplasmic polysomes are present in dendrites, with specifi c mRNAs being enriched in dendrites.Dendrites begin to branch extensively near the perikaryon and form extensive arbors in the vicinity of the perikaryon.Dendritic branches form acute angles and are smaller than the parent stem.Dendrites are rich in postsynaptic specializations, particularly on the spines that project from the dendritic shaft.Dendrites may generate action potentials, but more commonly they modulate the electrical state of perikaryon and initial segment.Dendritic architecture is most suitable for integrating synaptic responses from a variety of inputs, i.e., neuronal input.a Neurons typically have two classes of cytoplasmic extensions that may be distinguished using electrophysiological, morphological, and biochemical criteria. Although some neuronal processes may lack one or more of these features, enough parameters can generally be defi ned to allow unambiguous identifi cation.The distribution to specific loci of organelles, receptors, and ion channels is critical to normal neuronal function. In turn, these loci must be "matched" appropriately to the local microenvironment and specific cell-cell interactions. Similarly, in myelinating glial cells during the narrow developmental window when the myelin sheath is being formed, these cells synthesize sheets of insulating plasma membrane at an unbelievably high rate. To understand how the plasma membrane of neurons and glia might be modeled to fit individual functional requirements, it is necessary to review the progress that has been made so far in our understanding of how membrane components and organelles are generated in eukaryotic cells.There are two major categories of membrane proteins: integral and peripheral. Integral membrane proteins, which include the receptors for neurotransmitters and polypeptide growth factors, have segments that either are embedded in the lipid bilayer or are bound covalently to molecules that insert into the membrane, such as those proteins linked to glycosyl phosphatidylinositol at their C termini. A protein with a single membrane-embedded segment and an N terminus exposed at the extracellular surface is said to be of type I, whereas type II proteins retain their N termini on the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane. Peripheral membrane proteins are localized on the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane and do not traverse any membrane during their biogenesis. They interact with membranes either by means of their associations with membrane lipids or the cytoplasmic tails of integral proteins, or by means of their affinity for other peripheral proteins. In some cases, they may bind electrostatically to the polar head groups of the lipid bilayer.The subcellular destinations of integral and peripheral membrane proteins are determined by their sites of synthesis. In the secretory pathway, integral membrane proteins and secretory proteins are synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum, whereas the mRNAs encoding peripheral proteins are translated on cytoplasmic "free" polysomes, which are not membrane associated but which may interact with cytoskeletal structures.The pathway by which secretory proteins are synthesized and exported was first postulated through the elegant ultrastructural studies on the pancreas by George Palade and colleagues Pulse-chase radioautography has revealed that in eukaryotic cells newly synthesized secretory proteins move from the RER to the Golgi apparatus, where the proteins are packaged into secretory granules and transported to the plasma membrane across which they are released by exocytosis. Pulse-chase studies in neurons reveal a similar sequence of events for proteins transported into the axon. Unraveling of the detailed molecular mechanisms of the pathway began with the successful reconstitution of secretory protein biosynthesis in vitro and the direct demonstration that, very early during synthesis, secretory proteins are translocated into the lumen of RER vesicles, prepared by cell fractionation, termed microsomes. A key observation here was that the fate of the protein was sealed as a result of encapsulation in the lumen of the RER at the site of synthesis. This cotranslational insertion model provided a logical framework for understanding the synthesis of integral membrane proteins with a transmembrane orientation.The process by which integral membrane proteins are synthesized closely follows the secretory pathway, except that integral proteins are of course not released from the cell, but instead remain bound to cellular membranes. Synthesis of integral proteins begins with synthesis of the nascent chain on a polysome that is not yet bound to the RER membrane A few polypeptides deviate from the common pathway for secretion. For example, certain peptide growth factors, such as basic fibroblast growth factor and ciliary neurotrophic factor, are synthesized without signal peptide sequences but are potent biological modulators of cell survival and differentiation. These growth factors appear to be released under certain conditions, although the mechanisms for such release are still controversial. One possibility is that release of these factors may be associated primarily with cellular injury.Two cotranslational modifications commonly are associated with the emergence of the polypeptide on the luminal face of the RER. First, an N-terminal hydrophobic signal sequence that is used for insertion into the RER usually is removed by a signal peptidase. Second, oligosaccharides rich in mannose sugars are transferred from a lipid carrier, dolichol phosphate, to the side chains of asparagine residues , however, many variations on this basic theme have been found. Simply stated:1. Signal sequences for membrane insertions need not be only N-terminal those that lie within a polypeptide sequence are not cleaved. 2. A second type of signal, a "halt" or "stop" transfer signal, functions to arrest translocation through the membrane bilayer. The halt transfer signal is also hydrophobic and usually is flanked by positive charges. This arrangement effectively stabilizes a polypeptide segment in the RER membrane bilayer. 3. The sequential display in tandem of insertion and halt transfer signals in a polypeptide as it is being synthesized ultimately determines its disposition with respect to the phospholipid bilayer, and thus its final topology in its target membrane. By synthesizing transmembrane polypeptides in this way, virtually any topology may be generated.When the newly synthesized protein has established its correct transmembrane orientation in the RER, it is incorporated into vesicles and must pass through the Golgi complex before reaching the plasma membrane In general, however, for the vast majority of polypeptides destined for release from the cell, an N-terminal "signal sequence" first mediates the passage of the protein into the RER and is cleaved immediately from the polypeptide by a signal peptidase residing on the luminal side of the RER. For proteins destined to remain as permanent residents of cellular membranes, and in the trans-Golgi network, whereas sculpting of oligosaccharides is primarily the responsibility of the cis-, medial-, and trans-Golgi stacks. The TGN is a tubulovesicular network wherein proteins are targeted to the plasma membrane or to organelles.The CGN serves an important sorting function for proteins entering the Golgi from the RER. Because most proteins that move from the RER through the secretory pathway do so by default, any resident endoplasmic reticulum proteins must be restrained from exiting or returned promptly to the RER from the CGN should they escape. Although no retention signal has been demonstrated for the endoplasmic reticulum, two retrieval signals have been identified: a Lys-AspGlu-Leu or KDEL sequence in type I proteins and the Arg-Arg or RR motif in the first five amino acids of proteins with a type II orientation in the membrane. The KDEL tetrapeptide binds to a receptor called Erd 2 in the CGN, and the receptor-ligand complex is returned to the RER. There may also be a receptor for the N arginine dipeptide alternatively, this sequence may interact with other components of the retrograde transport machinery, such as microtubules.Movement of proteins between Golgi stacks proceeds by means of vesicular budding and fusion Fusion of vesicles with their target membrane in the Golgi apparatus is believed to be regulated by a series of proteins, N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor, soluble NSF attachment proteins, and SNAP receptors, which together assist the vesicle in docking with its target membrane. The emerging view is that complementary SNARES on membranes destined to fuse are fundamentally responsible for driving membrane fusion. In addition, Rabs, a family of membrane-bound GTPases, act in concert with their own GAPs, GEFs, and a cytosolic protein that dissociates Rab-GDP from membranes after fusion called guanine-nucleotide dissociation inhibitor. Rabs are believed to regulate the action of SNAREs, the proteins directly engaged in membrane-membrane contact prior to fusion. The tight control necessary for this process and the importance of ensuring that vesicle fusion takes place only at the appropriate target membrane may explain why eukaryotic cells contain so many Rabs, some of which are known to take part specifically in the internalization of endocytic vesicles at the plasma membrane Exocytosis of the neurotransmitter at the synapse must occur in an even more finely regulated manner than endocytosis. The proteins first identified in vesicular fusion events in the secretory pathway appear to play a part in the fusion of synaptic vesicles with the active zones of the presynaptic neuronal membrane , and syntaxin corresponds to t-SNARE. VAMP does not facilitate fusion with endocytotic vesicle compartments. SNAP-25 is an accessory protein that binds to syntaxin. In the constitutive pathway, such as between the RER and Golgi apparatus, assembly of the complex at the target membrane promotes fusion. However, at the presynaptic membrane, Ca 2 influx is required to stimulate membrane fusion. Synaptotagmin is believed to be the Ca 2 -sensitive regulatory protein in the complex that binds syntaxin. Neurexins appear to have a role in regulation as well, because, in addition to interacting with synaptotagmin, they are the targets of black widow spider venom-latrotoxin, which deregulates the Ca 2 -dependent exocytosis of the neurotransmitter. However, a superfi cially disturbing lack of specifi city in the ability of other membrane-bound SNARES to complex indicates that much remains to be learned about the regulation of SRAE-mediated membrane fusion.When comparing secretion in slow-releasing cells, such as the pancreatic-cell, and neurotransmitter release at the neuromuscular junction, two differences stand out. First, the speed of neurotransmitter release is much greater both in release from a single vesicle and in total release in response to a specific signal. Releasing the contents of a single synaptic vesicle at a mouse neuromuscular junction takes from 1 to 2 ms, and the response to an action potential involving the release of many synaptic vesicles is over in approximately 5 ms. In contrast, releasing the insulin in a single secretory granule by a pancreatic-cell takes from 1 to 5 s, and the full release response may take from 1 to 5 min. A 103-to 105-fold difference in rate is an extraordinary range, making neurotransmitter release one of the fastest biological events routinely encountered, but this speed is critical for a properly functioning nervous system. A second major difference between slow secretion and fast secretion is seen in the recycling of vesicles. In the pancreas, secretory vesicles carrying insulin are used only once, and so new secretory vesicles must be assembled de novo and released from the TGN to meet future requirements. In the neuron, the problem is that the synapse may be at a distance of 1 m or more from the protein synthetic machinery of the perikaryon, and so newly assembled vesicles even traveling at rapid axonal transport rates may take more than a day to arrive. Now, the number of synaptic vesicles released in 15 min of constant stimulation at a single frog neuromuscular junction has been calculated to be on the order of 105 vesicles, but a single terminal may have only a few hundred vesicles at any one time. These measurements would make no sense if synaptic vesicles had to be replaced constantly through new synthesis in the perikaryon, as is the case with insulincarrying vesicles. The reason that these numbers are possible is that synaptic vesicles are taken up locally by endocytosis, refilled with neurotransmitter, and reutilized at a rate fast enough to keep up with normal physiological stimulation levels. This takes place within the presynaptic terminal, and evidence shows that these recycled synaptic vesicles are used preferentially. Such recycling does not require protein synthesis because the classical neurotransmitters are small molecules, such as acetylcholine, or amino acids, such as glutamate, that can be synthesized or obtained locally.Significantly, neurons have fast and slow secretory pathways operating in parallel in the presynaptic terminal Most of the N-linked oligosaccharide chains acquired at the RER are remodeled in the Golgi cisternae, and while the proteins are in transit, another type of glycosyl linkage to serine or threonine residues through N-acetylgalactosamine can also be made. Modification of existing sugar chains by a series of glycosidases and the addition of further sugars by glycosyl transferases occur from the cis to the trans stacks. Some of these enzymes have been localized to particular cisternae. For example, the enzymes-1,4-galactosyltransferase and-2,6-sialyltransferase are concentrated in the trans-Golgi. How they are retained there is a matter of some debate. One idea is that these proteins are anchored by oligomerization. Another view is that the progressively rising concentration of cholesterol in membranes more distal to the ER in the secretory pathway increases membrane thickness, which in turn anchors certain proteins and causes an arrest in their flow along the default route.The default or constitutive pathway seems to be the direct route to the plasma membrane taken by vesicles that bud from the TGN Two types of membrane invagination occur at the surface of mammalian cells and are clearly distinguishable by electron microscopy. The first type is a caveola, which has a thread-like structure on its surface made of the protein caveolin. Caveolae mediate the uptake of small molecules and may also have a role in concentrating proteins linked to the plasma membrane by the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor. Demonstration of the targeting of protein tyrosine kinases to caveolae by the tripeptide signal MGC also suggests that caveolae may function in signal transduction cascades.The other type of endocytic vesicle at the cell surface is that coated with the distinctive meshwork of clathrin triskelions. The triskelion comprises three copies of a clathrin heavy chain and three copies of a clathrin light chain A further component of the endocytic complex at the plasma membrane is the GTPase dynamin, which seems to be required for the normal budding of coated vesicles during endocytosis. Dynamins are a family of 100-kDa GTPases found in both neuronal and nonneuronal cells that may interact with the AP-2 component of a clathrin-coated pit The primary function of clathrin-coated vesicles at the plasma membrane is to deliver membrane proteins together with any ligands bound to them to the early endosomal apparatus. Regulation of membrane cycling in the endosomal compartment is likely to include the Rab family of small GTP-binding proteins. Indeed, each stage of the endocytic pathway may have its own Rab protein to ensure efficient targeting of the vesicle to the appropriate membrane. Rab6 is believed to have a role in transport from the TGN to endosomes, whereas Rab9 may regulate vesicular flow in the reverse direction. In neurons, Rab5a has a role in regulating the fusion of endocytic vesicles and early endosomes and appears to function in endocytosis from both somatodendritic domains and the axon. The association of the protein with synaptic vesicles in nerve terminals, attached presumably by means of its isoprenoid tail, also suggests that early endosomal compartments may have a role in the packaging and recycling of synaptic vesicles.Peripheral membrane proteins are synthesized in the same type of free polysome in which the bulk of the cytosolic proteins are made. However, the cell must ensure that these membrane proteins are sent to the plasma membrane rather than allowed to attach in a haphazard way to other intracellular organelles. The fact that a complex machinery has evolved to ensure the correct delivery of integral membrane proteins suggests that some equivalent targeting mechanism must exist for proteins that attach to the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane. Such proteins are translated on "free" polysomes, but these polysomes are associated with cytoskeletal structures and are not distributed uniformly throughout the cell body. In a number of cases, mRNAs that encode soluble cytosolic proteins are concentrated in discrete regions of the cell, resulting in a local accumulation of the translated protein close to the site of action. For some peripheral membrane proteins, this is the plasma membrane.Evidence that this mechanism might operate in peripheral membrane protein synthesis came from studies showing biochemically and by in situ hybridization that mRNAs encoding the myelin basic proteins are concentrated in the myelinating processes that extend from the cell body of oligodendrocytes Myelin basic protein may be a special case because of its very strong positive charge and consequent propensity for binding promiscuously to the negatively charged polar head groups of membrane lipids. Nevertheless, the fact that actin mRNAs are localized to the leading edge of cultured myocytes and mRNA for the microtubule-associated protein MAP2b is concentrated in the dendrites of neurons suggest that targeting by local synthesis is more common than originally thought. This mechanism is probably less important for peripheral membrane proteins that associate with the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane by means of strong specific associations with proteins already located at the membrane because such proteins would act as specific receptors. Because only selected cytoplasmic mRNAs are localized to the periphery, the process is specific. However, no mRNAs are localized exclusively to the periphery, and a significant fraction typically is localized proximal to the nucleus in a region rich with the translational and protein-processing machinery of the cell.Membrane biogenesis and protein synthesis in neurons and glial cells are accomplished by the same mechanisms that have been worked out in great detail in other cell types. Integral membrane proteins are synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum, and peripheral membrane proteins are products of cytoplasmic-free ribosomes that are found in the cell sap. For transmembrane proteins and secretory polypeptides, synthesis in the RER is followed by transport to the Golgi apparatus, where membranes and proteins are sorted and targeted for delivery to precise intracellular locations. It is likely that the neuron and glial cell have evolved additional highly specialized mechanisms for membrane and protein sorting and targeting because these cells are so greatly extended in space, although these additional mechanisms have yet to be fully described. The basic features of the process of secretion, which includes neurotransmitter delivery to presynaptic terminals, are beginning to be understood as well. The key features of this process are apparently common to all cells, including yeast, although the neuron has developed certain specializations and modifications of the secretory pathway that reflect its unique properties as an excitable cell.The cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells is an aggregate structure formed by three classes of cytoplasmic structural proteins: microtubules, microfilaments, and intermediate filaments. Each of these elements exists concurrently and independently in overlapping cellular domains. Most cell types contain one or more examples of each class of cytoskeletal structure, but there are exceptions. For example, mature mammalian erythrocytes contain no microtubules or intermediate filaments, but they do have highly specialized actin cytoskeletons. Among cells of the nervous system, the oligodendrocyte is unusual in that it contains no cytoplasmic intermediate filaments. Typically, each cell type in the nervous system has a unique complement of cytoskeletal proteins that are important for the differentiated function of that cell type.Although the three classes of cytoskeletal elements interact with each other and with other cellular structures, all three are dynamic structures rather than passive structural elements. Their aggregate properties form the basis of cell morphologies and plasticity in the nervous tissue. In many cases, the cytoskeleton is biochemically specialized for a particular cell type, function, and developmental stage. Each type of cytoskeletal element has unique functions essential for a functional nervous system.Microtubules are near ubiquitous cytoskeletal components in eukaryotes As a result, many fundamental properties of microtubules were defined with microtubule protein from brain extracts. However, neuronal microtubules have biochemical specializations to meet the unique demands imposed by neuronal size and shape.Intracellular transport and generation of cell morphologies are the most important roles played by microtubules in the nervous system. In part, this comes from their ability to organize cytoplasmic polarity. Microtubules in vitro are dynamic, polar structures with plus and minus ends that correspond to the fastand slow-growing ends, respectively. In contrast, both stable and labile microtubules can be identified in vivo, where they help define both microscopic and macroscopic aspects of intracellular organization in cells. Microtubule organization, stability, and composition are all highly regulated in the nervous system. By electron microscopy, microtubules appear as hollow tubes 25 nm in diameter and can be hundreds of micrometers in length in axons. Microtubule walls typically comprise 13 protofilaments formed by a linear arrangement of globular subunits. Globular subunits in microtubule walls are heterodimers of a-and b-tubulin, with a variety of microtubule-associated proteins binding to microtubule surfaces.Neuronal microtubules are remarkable for their genetic and biochemical diversity. Multiple genes exist for both a-and b-tubulins. These genes are expressed differentially according to cell type and developmental stage. Some genetic isotypes are expressed ubiquitously, whereas others are expressed only at specific times in development, in specific cell types, or both. Most tubulin genes are expressed in nervous tissue, and some are enriched or specific to neurons. Specific tubulin isotypes prepared in a pure form, vary in assembly kinetics and ability to bind ligands. However, when more than one isotype is expressed in a single cell, such as a neuron, they coassemble into microtubules with mixed composition.The most common posttranslational modifications of tubulins are tyrosination-detyrosination, acetylation-deacetylation, and phosphorylation. The first two are intimately linked to assembled microtubules, but little is known about physiological functions for any tubulin modification. Most a-tubulin isotypes are synthesized with a Glu-Tyr dipeptide at the C terminus, but the tyrosine is removed by tubulin carboxypeptidase after incorporation into a microtubule, leaving a terminal glutamate. Microtubules assembled for a longer time are enriched in Glu-tubulin, but when Glu-tubulin enriched microtubules are disassembled, liberated a-tubulins are rapidly retyrosinated by tubulin tyrosine ligase. The tyrosination state of a-tubulin does not affect assembly-disassembly kinetics in vitro, but detyrosination may affect interactions of microtubules with other cellular structures. Concurrent with detyrosination, atubulins can be subject to a specific acetylation. Tubulin acetylation was fi rst described in flagellar tubulins, but this modification is widespread in neurons and many other cell types. Acetylase acts preferentially on atubulin in assembled microtubules, so long-lived or stable microtubules tend to be acetylated, but the distribution of microtubules rich in acetylated tubulin may not be identical to that of Glu-tubulin. Acetylated a-tubulin is rapidly deacetylated upon microtubule disassembly, but acetylation does not alter microtubule stability in vitro.Tubulin phosphorylation involves b-tubulin and may be restricted to an isotype expressed preferentially in neurons and neuron-like cells. Various kinases can phosphorylate tubulin in vitro, but the endogenous kinase is unknown. Effects of phosphorylation on assembly are unknown, but phosphorylation is upregulated during neurite outgrowth. As with a-tubulin modifications, the physiological role of phosphorylation on neuronal b-tubulin has yet to be determined. Other posttranslational modifications have been reported, but their significance and distribution in the nervous system are not well documented.The biochemical diversity of microtubules is increased through association of different MAPs with different populations of microtubules MAPs in nervous tissue fall into two heterogeneous groups: tau proteins and high molecular weight MAPs. Tau proteins have been of intense interest because posttranslationally modified tau proteins are the primary constituents of neurofibrillary tangles in the brains of Alzheimer patients. Tau proteins are primarily neuronal MAPs, although tau may be found outside neurons as well. Tau binds to microtubules during assembly-disassembly cycles with a constant stoichiometry and promotes microtubule assembly and stabilization. Tau exists in a number of molecular weight isoforms expressed differenctially in different regions of the nervous system and developmental stage. For example, tau proteins in the adult CNS are typically 60-75 kDa, whereas PNS axons contain a higher molecular mass tau of 100 kDa. Different isoforms of tau protein are generated from a single mRNA by alternative splicing, and additional heterogeneity is produced by phosphorylation.High molecular weight MAPs are a diverse group of largely unrelated proteins found in various tissues, some of which are brain specific. All have molecular masses greater than 1300 kDa and form side arms protruding from microtubule surfaces. Many MAPs may participate in microtubule assembly and cytoskeletal organization. Traditionally, high molecular weight MAPs comprise five polypeptides: MAPs 1a, 1b, 1c, 2a, and 2b. MAP-2 proteins are closely related and located primarily in dendrites. In contrast, the polypeptides known as MAP-1 are unique polypeptides with little sequence homology. MAPs 1a and 1b are expressed widely and regulated developmentally. MAPs 1a, 1b, and 2 are all thought to play important roles in stabilizing and organizing the microtubule cytoskeleton.In most cell types, cytoplasmic microtubules are dynamic, although stable microtubule segments are found in all cells. In nonneuronal cells, such as astrocytes and other glia, microtubules typically are anchored in centrosomal regions that serve as microtubule-organizing centers. As a result, their cytoplasmic microtubules are oriented with plus ends at the cell periphery. The biochemistry of microtubuleorganizing centers is not fully understood, but they contain a novel tubulin subunit, g-tubulin, which functions as a microtubule nucleating protein. In contrast, dendritic and axonal microtubules of neurons are not continuous with a microtubule-organizing center, so alternate mechanisms must exist for their stabilization and organization. The situation is complicated further because dendritic and axonal microtubules differ in both composition and organization. Both axonal and dendritic microtubules are nucleated at the microtubule-organizing center but are subsequently released for delivery to the appropriate compartment. The release of microtubules from the microtubuleorganizing center appears to involve the microtubule severing protein, katanin Stabilization of axonal and dendritic microtubules is essential because of the volume of cytoplasm and the distance from sites of protein synthesis for tubulin. A common side effect of one class of antineoplastic drugs, the vinca alkaloids, underscores the importance of microtubule stability in axons. Vincristine and other vinca alkaloids act by destabilizing spindle micro- MAP-1a1b Widely expressed in neurons and glia, including both axons and dendrites developmentally regulated phosphoproteins.Dendrite-specifi c MAPs. The smaller MAP-2c is regulated developmentally, becoming restricted to spines in adults, whereas 2a and 2b are major phosphoproteins in adult brain.Tau proteins are enriched in axons with a distinctive phosphorylation pattern. A single tau gene is alternatively spliced to give multiple isoforms.Katanin Enriched at the microtubule organizing center and thought to be important in the release of microtubules for transport into axons and dendrites.KinesinsKinesin-1s are plus-end directed motors associated with membrane-bound organelles and moving them in fast axonal transport. The other members of the kinesin family are a diverse set of motor proteins with a kinesinrelated motor domain and varied tails. Many are regulated developmentally and some are mitotic motors, restricted to dividing cells.Axonemal dynein A set of minus-end-directed microtubule motors associated with cilia and fl agella, such as ependymal cells.Cytoplasmic dynein Cytoplasmic forms may be involved in the axonal transport of either organelles or cytoskeletal elements.tubules, but dosage must be monitored carefully to prevent development of peripheral neuropathies due to loss of axonal microtubules. Microtubules play critical roles in both dendritic and axonal function, so mechanisms to ensure their proper extent and organization exist. Axonal microtubules contain a particularly stable subset of microtubule segments resistant to depolymerization by antimitotic drugs, cold, and calcium. Stable microtubule segments are biochemically distinct and may constitute more than half of the axonal tubulin. Stable domains in microtubules may serve to regulate the axonal cytoskeleton by nucleating and organizing microtubules as well as stabilizing them. The biochemical basis of microtubule stability is not well understood but may include posttranslational modification of tubulins, presence of stabilizing proteins, or both. Relatively little is known about regulation of dendritic microtubules, but local synthesis of MAP-2 in dendrites may play a role.The actin cytoskeleton is universal in eukaryotes, although microfilaments are most familiar as thin filaments in skeletal muscle. Microfilaments Multiple actin genes exist in both vertebrates and invertebrates. Four a-actin human genes have been cloned, each expressed specifically in a different muscle cell type. In addition, two nonmuscle actin genes are present in humans. b-actin and g-actin genes are expressed ubiquitously and are abundant in nervous tissue. The functional significance of different genetic isotypes is not clear because actins are highly conserved. Across the range of known actin sequences, amino acids are identical at approximately two of three positions. Even the positions of introns within different actin genes are highly conserved across species and genes. Despite the high degree of conservation, differences in distribution of specific isotypes within a single neuron are seen. For example, bactin may be enriched in growth cones. The prominent actin bundles seen in some nonneuronal cells in culture are not characteristic of neurons and most neuronal microfilaments are less than 1 mm in length.Many microfilament-associated proteins are found in nervous tissue, but less is known about their distribution and normal function in neurons and glia. Myosins and myosin-associated proteins are considered in the section on molecular motors, but multiple categories of actin-binding proteins exist Several proteins have been identified that cap microfilaments, serving to anchor them to other structures or regulate microfilament length. The ezrinradixin-moesin gene family encodes barbed-end capping proteins that are concentrated at sites where the microfilaments meet the plasma membrane, suggesting a role in anchoring microfilaments or linking them to   Whereas some membrane proteins interact directly with microfilaments in the membrane cytoskeleton, others interact with the actin cytoskeleton through intermediaries. Proteins such as spectrin, a-actinin, and dystrophins cross-link, or bundle, microfilaments, giving rise to higher order complexes. Spectrin is enriched in the cortical membrane cytoskeleton and is thought to have a role in localization of integral membrane proteins such as ion channels and receptors. Dystrophin is the best known member of a family of proteins that appear to be essential for clustering of receptors in muscle and nervous tissue. A mutation in dystrophin is responsible for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Positioning of integral membrane proteins on the cell surface is an essential function of the actin-rich membrane cytoskeleton, acting in concert with a class of proteins that contain the protein-binding module, the PDZ domain.Members of the gelsolin family have multiple activities. They not only cap the barbed end of a microfilament, but also sever microfilaments and can nucleate microfilament assembly. Severing-capping proteins may be critical for reorganizing the actin cytoskeleton. The Ca 2 dependence of gelsolin severing activity may provide a mechanism for altering the membrane cytoskeleton in response to Ca 2 transients. Other second messengers, such as phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, may also regulate gelsolin function, suggesting interplay between different classes of actinbinding proteins such as gelsolin and profilin. Oligodendrocytes are the only nonneural cells in the CNS that express significant amounts of the actin-binding and microfilament-severing protein gelsolin.Proteins with other functions may interact directly with actin or actin microfilaments. For example, some membrane proteins, such as epidermal growth factor receptor, bind actin microfilaments directly, which may be important in anchoring these components at a particular location on the cell surface. Other cytoskeletal structures also interact with microfi laments. Both MAP-2 and tau microtubule-associated proteins can interact with microfilaments in vitro and may mediate interactions between microtubules and microfilaments. Finally, the synaptic vesicle-associated phosphoprotein, synapsin I, has a phosphorylation-sensitive interaction with microfilaments that may be important for targeting and storage of synaptic vesicles in the presynaptic terminal Intermediate filaments appear as solid, ropelike fibrils from 8 to 12 nm in diameter that may be many micrometers long Most neuronal intermediate filament have three distinct subunits present in varying stochiometries, all type IV polypeptides. Apparent molecular mass for neurofilament subunits vary widely across species, but mammalian forms are typically a triplet ranging from 180 to 200 kDa for the high molecular weight subunit, from 130 to 170 kDa for the medium subunit, and from 60 to 70 kDa for NFL. Neurofilament triplet proteins are each encoded by a separate type IV intermediate filament gene, which have a characteristic domain structure that can be recognized in both primary sequence and gene structure. Type IV genes typically are expressed only in neurons, although Schwann cells in damaged peripheral nerves may also transiently express NFM and NFL. Neurofi lament polypeptides initially were identified from axonal transport studies. Neurofilament subunits are highly phosphorylated in axons, particularly NFM and NFH. In humans and some other species, NFH has more than 50 repeats of a consensus phosphorylation site at its carboxy terminus, and levels of NFH phosphorylation indicate that most are phosphorylated in vivo. This high level of phosphorylation in neurofilament tail domains is a distinctive characteristic of neurofilaments.A second motif characteristic of neurofilaments is the presence of a glutamate-rich region in the tail adjacent to the core rod domain. This glutamate region has particular significance for neuroscientists because it appears to be the basis for reaction of the classic neurofibrillary silver stains for neurons. These stains were introduced in the late nineteenth century and used extensively by histologists and neuroanatomists from Ramon y Cajals time to the present. The molecular basis of neurofibrillary stains was unknown until 1968, when F. O. Schmitt showed that neurofibrils were formed by neurofilaments. Remarkably, the ability of neurofilament subunits to react with silver histological stains is retained even after separation in gel electrophoresis for neurofilaments from organisms as diverse as human, squid, and the marine fanworm, Altered expression levels of neurofilament subunits or mutations in neurofilament genes are associated with some neuropathologies. Disruption of neurofilament organization is a hallmark of pathology for many degenerative diseases of the nervous system, particularly those affecting large myelinated axons such as those of spinal motor neurons, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Overexpression of normal NFH or expression of some mutant NFL genes in transgenic mouse models leads to the accumulation of neurofilaments in the cell body and proximal axon of spinal motor neurons, similar to those seen in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and related motor neuron diseases. Similarly, an early indicator of neuropathies due to neurotoxins such as acrylamide and hexanedione is accumulation of neurofilaments in either proximal or distal regions of axons. However, the question of whether neurofilament defects are a primary event in pathogenesis or refl ect an underlying metabolic pathology remains unclear.Another type IV intermediate filament gene expressed only in neurons is a-internexin. Unlike the triplet, a-internexin is expressed preferentially early in development and disappears from most neurons during maturation. Intermediate filament with ainternexin do persist in some adult neurons, such as the branched axons of granule cells in the cerebellar cortex. Although a-internexin can coassemble with neurofilament triplet subunits, it also forms homopolymeric filaments. The primary sequence of a-internexin has features in common with NFL and NFM that are thought to confer assembly properties distinct from other type IV intermediate filaments.The final intermediate protein expressed in the nervous system is nestin, which is seen transiently during early development. Nestin is expressed in neurons, Schwann cells and oligodendrocyte progenitors, which appear late in the development of the embryonic nervous system. Remarkably, nestin is expressed almost exclusively in ectodermal cells after commitment to the neuroglial lineage, but prior to terminal differentiation. At 1250 kDa, nestin is the largest intermediate filament subunit and the most divergent in sequence. Several distinctive features lead some to classify nestin as a sixth type of intermediate filament, whereas others group it with type IV genes. Relatively little is known about assembly properties of nestin in vivo or physiological functions of nestin filaments in neuroectodermal cells.Each class of cytoskeletal structures may be found without the others in some cellular domains, but all three classes-microtubules, microfilaments, and intermediate filaments-coexist in many domains and inevitably interact. These interactions are typically dynamic, rather than through stable cross-links to one another. As mentioned earlier, microtubules and neurofilaments have highly phosphorylated side arms projecting from their surfaces. The high density of negative surface charge tends to repel structures with a like charge and rigidify microtubules and neurofilaments, affecting axon diameter.The growth cone is a unique neuronal domain with distinctive cytoskeletal organization, such as longer microfilaments in filopodia and feurofilaments are excluded from growth cones, typically extending no further than the growth cone neck. In contrast, microtubules and microfilaments play complementary roles in growth cones. Microfilaments are critical in sprouting but less critical for elongation. In contrast, disrupting microtubules in distal neurites inhibits neurite elongation, but does not affect sprouting.The intracellular framework giving shape to neurons and glia is the cytoskeleton, a complicated set of structures and their associated proteins. These organelles are also responsible for intracellular movement of materials and, during development, for cell migration and plasma membrane extension within nervous tissue.Until 1985, our knowledge of molecular motors in vertebrate cells of any type was restricted to myosins and flagellar dyneins. Myosins were identified in nervous tissue, but functions were uncertain. The preponderance of evidence indicated that fast axonal transport was microtubule based, so there was considerable interest in cytoplasmic dyneins, but initial studies failed to fi nd a functional cytoplasmic dynein. However, a better understanding of molecular motors in the nervous system has now emerged, largely through studies on axonal transport Myosins and dyneins can be distinguished pharmacologically by their differential susceptibility to inhibitors of ATPase activity, but the spectrum of inhibitors active against fast axonal transport fails to match properties of either myosin or dynein. The most striking difference between inhibitor effects on axonal transport and on myosin or dynein motors was seen with a nonhydrolyzable analog of ATP. Adenylylimidodiphosphate is a weak competitive inhibitor of both myosin and dynein, requiring a 10-to 100-fold excess of analog. In contrast, both anterograde and retrograde axonal transport stop within minutes of AMP-PNP perfusion into isolated axoplasm, even in the presence of stoichiometric concentrations of ATP. Organelles moving in both directions freeze in place and remain attached to microtubules. AMP-PNP weakens interactions of myosin with microfilaments and of dynein with microtubules, but stabilizes binding of membrane-bound organelles to microtubules. Thus, effects of AMP-PNP indicated that axonal transport of membrane-bound organelles involved another type of motor, distinct from both myosins and dyneins.The effects of AMP-PNP both demonstrated the existence of a new type of motor protein and provided a basis for identifying its constituent polypeptides. Binding of this ATPase to microtubules should be increased by AMP-PNP and decreased by ATP. Polypeptides meeting this criterion soon were identified and the new mechanochemical ATPase was named kinesin, based initially on an ability to move microtubules across glass coverslips as plus-end directed motor. Studies soon established that kinesin was a microtubule-activated ATPase with minimal basal activity. This combination of ATPase activity and motility in vitro confirmed it as the fi rst member of a new class of microtubule-based motor, the kinesins Kinesins are now known to comprise over 40 different genes in at least 14 subfamilies all with a highly conserved motor domain that includes ATP-and microtubule-binding domains, Kinesin-1, the founding member of the kinesin superfamily, remains the most abundant class of kinesin expressed in brain and other tissues, leading to an extensive characterization of its biochemical, pharmacological, immunochemical, and molecular properties. Electron microscopic and biophysical analyses reveal kinesin as a long, rod-shaped protein, approximately 80 nm in length. Kinesin-1 is a heterotetramer with two heavy chains and two light chains. Localization of antibodies specific for kinesin subunits by high resolution electron microscopy of brain kinesin indicates that two heavy chains arranged in parallel, forming the heads and much of the shaft, whereas light chains are localized to the fan-shaped tail region ATP-binding and microtubule-binding domains of kinesin are in the heavy chain head regions. Axonal microtubules are oriented with plus ends distal from the cell body, so anterograde transport would require a motor that moves organelles toward the plus end direction. Three different genes for kinesin-1 heavy chain are expressed in neurons, one of which is neuronspecifi c, along with two light chain genes. Kinesin-1 appears associated with a variety of membrane-bound organelles, including synaptic vesicles or their precursors, mitochondria, and endosomes. Mechanisms for associating specifi c kinesin-1 isoforms with specifi c neuronal cargoes are incompletely understood. In the case of kinesin, the interaction is thought to involve both kinesin light chains and the carboxy termini of the heavy chains. Remarkably, mutations in the neuron-specifi c isoform of kinesin-1 can lead to a form of hereditary spastic paraplegia, an adult onset neurodegenerative disease of motor neurons.An indirect result of the discovery of kinesin was the long sought cytoplasmic form of dynein, previously identifi ed as a high molecular weight MAP in brain called MAP-1c,. Both cytoplasmic dynein and kinesin-1 can be isolated from brain by incubation of microtubules with nucleotide-free soluble extracts. Both are bound to microtubules under these conditions and released by ATP. MAP-1c dynein moved microtubules in vitro with a polarity opposite that seen with kinesin and was identified as a two-headed cytoplasmic dynein using both structural and biochemical criteria. Dynein heavy chains are also a gene FIGURE 4.5 Examples of microtubule motor proteins in the mammalian nervous system. The first microtubule motor identified in nervous tissue was a kinesin 1, but showed 3 kinesin 1 genes including a neuron-specific form. Motor domains are well conserved by tail domains and appear to be specialized for interaction with various targets, such as different membrane-bound organelles. After the sequence of the kinesin heavy chain was established, the presence of additional genes that contained sequences homologous to the motor domain of kinesin was soon recognized. The molecular organization of these various motor proteins is diverse, including monomers, trimers, and tetramers. Cytoplasmic dynein may interact with membrane-bound organelles and cytoskeletal structures. Genetic methods have established that there may be  40 kinesin-related genes and 16 dynein heavy chains genes in a single organism.family with 14 fl agellar dyneins and two cytoplasmic dyneins Cytoplasmic dyneins are a 40-nm-long complex of molecular mass 1.6  10 6 Da, that include two heavy chains as well as multiple intermediate and light chains Myosins from muscle were the first molecular motors identified, but research in nonmuscle myosins has increased the number of myosins expressed in humans to some 40 different genes grouped in 18 different subfamilies The most familiar myosins are myosin II Myosin I proteins have a single, smaller heavy chain that does not form filaments but possesses a homologous actin-activated ATPase domain and has been purified from neural and neuroendocrine tissues The mouse mutation dilute, which affects coat color, results from mutations in a myosin V gene, which is distinct from both myosins I and II The diversity of brain myosins and their distinctive localization suggests that the various myosins may have narrowly defined functions. However, relatively little is known about specific neuronal functions for most myosins despite intensive study of myosins in the nervous system. Myosins likely play roles in growth cone motility, synaptic plasticity, and even neurotransmitter release. The axonal transport of myosin II-like proteins was described, but relatively little progress has been made in defi ning functions of myosin II in the mature nervous system. Even less is known about myosin I in the nervous system beyond their role in hair cell function. There are few instances in our knowledge of neuronal function in which we fully understand the role played by specific molecular motors, but members of all three classes are abundant in nervous tissue. Proliferation of different motor molecules and isoforms suggests that some physiological activities may require multiple classes of motor molecules.The concept is now firmly in place that neurons and glial cells, like other cells, contain multiple molecular motors responsible for moving discrete populations of molecules, particles, and organelles through intracellular compartments. The complex morphologies and diverse functional interactions of neurons mean that motor proteins and their regulation play a critical role in the nervous system.The functional architecture of neurons comprises many specializations in cytoskeletal and membranous components. Each of these specializations is dynamic, constantly changing, and being renewed at a rate determined by the local environment and cellular metabolism. Axonal transport processes represent a key to understanding neuronal dynamics and provide a basis for exploring neuronal development, regeneration, and neuropathology. Recent advances provide insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying axonal transport and its role in both normal neuronal function and pathology.Slow axonal transport has two major components, both representing movement of cytoplasmic constituents The coordinated movement of neurofilament and microtubule proteins provided strong evidence for the "structural hypothesis." For example, in pulselabeling experiments labeled neurofilament proteins move as a bell-shaped wave with little or no trailing of neurofilament protein Development of fl uorescently tagged neurofi lament or microtubule subunits and methods for visualizing these structures in living cells resolved this issue by documenting movements of individual microtubules and neurofi laments neurites of cultured neurons Studies on transport of neurofilament proteins indicated that little or no degradation occurs until neurofilaments reach nerve terminals, where they are degraded rapidly. Comparable results were obtained with microtubule proteins. Differential metabolism appears to be a key to targeting of cytoplasmic and cytoskeletal proteins. Proteins with slow degradative rates accumulate, reaching higher steady-state levels. Altering degradation rates changes that steady-state concentration, so enrichment of actin in presynaptic terminals is due to slower turnover of actin than neurofilaments and tubulin. As a result, inhibiting calpain causes neurofilament accumulation in terminals. Differential turnover may involve specific proteases or posttranslational modifications that affect susceptibility to degradation. Regardless, cytoplasmic proteins are degraded in the distal axon and do not return in retrograde axonal transport. 4.7 Slow axonal transport represents the delivery of cytoskeletal and cytoplasmic constituents to the periphery. Cytoplasmic proteins are synthesized on free polysomes and organized for transport as cytoskeletal elements or macromolecular complexes. Microtubules are formed by nucleation at the microtubule-organizing center near the centriolar complex and then released for migration into axons or dendrites. Slow transport appears to be unidirectional with no net retrograde component. Studies suggest that cytoplasmic dynein may move microtubules with their plus ends leading. Neurofilaments may move on their own or may hitchhike on microtubules. Once cytoplasmic structures reach their destinations, they are degraded by local proteases at a rate that allows either growth or maintenance of steady-state levels. The different composition and organization of cytoplasmic elements in dendrites suggest that different pathways may be involved in delivery of cytoskeletal and cytoplasmic materials to dendrites Early biochemical and morphological studies established that material moving in fast axonal transport was associated with membrane-bound organelles Electron microscopic analysis of materials accumulated at a ligation or crush demonstrated that organelles moving in the anterograde direction were morphologically distinct from those moving in the retrograde direction Biochemical and morphological approaches resulted in a detailed description of materials moved in fast axonal transport but were not suitable for identifying molecular motors for axonal transport. Methods that permitted direct observation of organelle movements and precise control of experimental conditions were required. Development of video-enhanced contrast microscopy allowed characterization of bidirectional movement of membrane-bounded organelles in giant axons from the squid Loligo pealeii The diversity of polypeptides in each axonal transport rate component and the coherent movement of proteins with very different molecular weights is a conundrum: How can so many different polypeptides move down the axon as a group Rate components of axonal transport move as discrete waves, each with a characteristic rate and a distinctive composition. The structural hypothesis was formulated in response to such observations. The hypothesis is deceptively simple: Axonal transport represents movement of discrete cytological structures. Proteins in axonal transport do not move as individual polypeptides. Instead, they move as part of a cytological structure or in association with a cytological structure. The only assumption made is that a limited number of elements can interact directly with transport motors so transported material must be packaged appropriately to be moved. Different rate components result from packaging of transported material into distinct cytological structures. In other words, membraneassociated proteins move as membrane-bounded organelles, whereas tubulins move as microtubules.Kinesin-1 isoforms appear to be the major motors for fast anterograde movement of membrane-bounded organelles such as vesicles and mitochondria. Similarly, cytoplasmic dynein appears to be the motor for fast retrograde transport of membranebounded structures. However, cytoplasmic dynein is also the involved in the anterograde transport of microtubules in slow axonal transport. Regulation of motor proteins is needed to assure that appropriate levels of axonal and synaptic components are delivered where needed in the neuron.Because synthesis of proteins occurs at some distance from many functional domains of a neuron, transport to distal regions of a neuron is necessary, but not sufficient, for proper function. Specific materials must also be delivered to proper sites of utilization and not left in inappropriate locations. For example, synaptophysin has no known function in axons or cell body, so it must be delivered to a presynaptic terminal along with other components necessary for regulated neurotransmitter release. The traditional picture places the presynaptic terminal at the axon end. Such images imply that synaptic vesicles need only move along axonal microtubules until reaching their ends in the presynaptic terminal. However, many CNS synapses are not at axon ends. Many terminals may be located sequentially along a single axon, making en passant contacts with multiple target cells. Targeting of synaptic vesicles then becomes a more complex problem and FIGURE 4.8 Fast axonal transport represents transport of membrane-associated materials, having both anterograde and retrograde components. For anterograde transport, most polypeptides are synthesized on membrane-bound polysomes, also known as rough endoplasmic reticulum, and then transferred to the Golgi for processing and packaging into specific classes of membrane-bound organelles. Proteins following this pathway include both integral membrane proteins and secretory polypeptides in the vesicle lumen. Cytoplasmic peripheral membrane proteins such as kinesins are synthesized on free polysomes. Once vesicles are assembled and appropriate motors associate with them, they move down the axon at a rate of 100-400 mm per day. Different membrane structures are delivered to different compartments and may be regulated independently. For example, dense core vesicles and synaptic vesicles are both targeted for presynaptic terminals, but release of vesicle contents involves distinct pathways. After vesicles merge with the plasma membrane, their protein constituents are taken up in coated vesicles via the receptor-mediated endocytic pathway and delivered to a sorting compartment. After proper sorting into appropriate compartments, membrane proteins either are committed to retrograde axonal transport or recycled targeting ion channels to nodes of Ranvier or other appropriate sites on the neuronal surface is equally challenging.Although specific details of targeting are not well understood, a simple model for targeting of synaptic vesicle precursors or ion channels serves to illustrate how such targeting may occur protein on a vesicle carrying a cargo targeted to that domain. Thus, phosphorylation of kinesin-1 carrying Na channels at the node of Ranvier would allow delivery of Na channels to the nodal membrane. Evidence for such a mechanism exists for delivery of membrane proteins to growth cones Although such models are speculative, they satisfy criteria that any mechanism for targeting to specific neuronal subdomains must address. Specifically, mechanisms must act locally because distances to cell body can be great and the number of targets is large. There must be some means to connect a targeting signal to the external microenvironment, such as a glial or muscle cell. Finally, there must be a way of distinguishing subdomains. Thus, synaptic vesicles will not be delivered to nodes of Ranvier and voltage-gated sodium channels for nodes are not targeted to presynaptic terminals. Careful segregation of different organelles and proteins to different domain of a neuron suggests that highly efficient targeting mechanisms do exist.A well-studied feature of the neuron is the phenomenon of axonal transport, which moves in both anterograde and retrograde directions. Axonal transport is responsible for delivery of both membraneassociated and cytoplasmic materials from the cell body to distant parts of the neuron, membrane retrieval and circulation, and uptake of materials from presynaptic terminals and dendrites as well as their delivery to the cell soma. Precise molecular mechanisms by which anterograde and retrograde transport are targeted within an individual dendrite or axon are still being defi ned.Neurons and glial cells have unusually large cell volumes enclosed within extensive plasma membrane surfaces. Nature has evolved a number of "universal" mechanisms in other systems and adapted them for the special needs of nervous tissue cells. The synthesis and packaging of components, and in particular proteins, destined for cytoplasmic organelles and cell surface subdomains engage general and evolutionarily conserved molecular mechanisms and pathways that are employed in single-cell yeasts as well as in cells in complex nervous tissue.Once synthesized and sorted, most intracellular organelles must be distributed, and targeted, to precise intracellular locations. Because they are so extended in space and exhibit exceptionally complex functional architecture, neurons and glial cells have adapted and developed to a high degree mechanisms that operate to distribute components within all cells. In neurons, movement of materials within the axon has been the central focus of most studies. The motors, cargoes, and regulation of axonal transport is now understood in some measure at the molecular level.The functional operations of neurons are the neural basis of behavior. In order to understand those operations, we need to understand how the different parts of the neuron interact. In this chapter we begin by considering how electrical current spreads.Neurons characteristically have elaborate dendritic trees arising from their cell bodies and single axons with their own terminal branching patterns. With this structural apparatus, neurons carry out fi ve basic functions 1. Generate intrinsic activity. 2. Receive synaptic inputs. 3. Integrate signals by combining synaptic responses with intrinsic membrane activity. 4. Encode output patterns in graded potentials or action potentials. 5. Distribute synaptic outputs.In addition to synaptic inputs and outputs, neurons may receive and send nonsynaptic signals in the form of electric fi elds, volume conduction through the extracellular environment of neurotransmitters and gases, and release of hormones into the bloodstream.A fundamental goal of neuroscience is to develop quantitative descriptions of these functional operations and their coordination within the neuron that enable the neuron to function as an integrated information processing system. This is the necessary basis for testing experiment-driven hypotheses that can lead to realistic empirical computational models of neurons, neural systems, and networks and their roles in information processing and behavior.Toward these ends, the fi rst task is to understand how activity spreads. To do this for a single process, such as the axon, is diffi cult enough for the branching dendrites it becomes extremely challenging and for the interactions between the two even more so. It is no exaggeration to say that the task of understanding how intrinsic activity, synaptic potentials, and active potentials spread through and are integrated within the complex geometry of dendritic trees to produce the input-output operations of the neuron is one of the main frontiers of molecular and cellular neuroscience.This chapter begins with the passive properties of the membrane underlying the spread of most types of neuronal activity. Chapter 12 then considers the active membrane properties that contribute to more complex types of information processing, particularly the types that take place in dendrites. Together, the two chapters provide an integrated theoretical framework for understanding the neuron as a complex information processing system. Both draw on other chapters for the specifi c properties-membrane receptors, internal receptors, synaptically gated membrane channels, intrinsic voltage-gated channels, and second-messenger systems-that mediate the operations of the neuron.Slow spread of neuronal activity is by ionic or chemical diffusion or active transport. Our main interest in this chapter is in rapid spread by electric current. What are the factors that determine this spread The most basic are electrotonic properties.Our understanding of electrotonic properties arose in the nineteenth century from a merging of the study of current spread in nerve cells and muscle with the development of cable theory for long distance transmission of electric current through cables on the ocean fl oor. The electrotonic properties of neurons therefore often are referred to as cable properties. Electrotonic theory was fi rst applied mathematically to the nervous system in the late nineteenth century for spread of electric current through nerve fi bers. By the 1930s and 1940s, it was applied to simple invertebrate axons-the fi rst steps toward the development of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations for the action potential in the axon.Mathematically it is impractical to apply cable theory to complex branching dendrites, but in the 1960s, Wilfrid Rall showed how this problem could be solved by the development of computational compartmental models A variety of software packages now makes it possible for even a beginning student to explore functional properties and construct realistic neuron models. These tools are all freely accessible on the Web The successful application of cable theory to nerve cells requires that it be based as closely as possible on the structural and functional properties of neuronal processes. The problem confronting the neuroscientist is that processes are complicated. As discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, a segment of axon or dendrite contains a variety of molecular species and organelles, is bounded by a plasma membrane with its own complex structure and irregular outline, and is surrounded by myriad of neighboring processes Describing the spread of electric current through such a segment therefore requires some carefully chosen simplifying assumptions, which allow the construction of an equivalent circuit of the electrical properties of such a segment. These are summarized in Box 5.1. Understanding them is essential for describing electrotonic spread under the different conditions that the nervous system presents.We begin by using the assumptions in Box 5.1 to represent a segment of a process by electrical resistances: an internal resistance r i connected to the r i of the neighboring segments and through the membrane resistance r m to ground where lambda is defi ned as the square root of r m r i and V 0 is the value of V at x  0. Inspection of this equation shows that when x  l, the ratio of V to V 0 is e  1  1e  0.37. Thus, lambda is a critical parameter defi ning the length over which the electrotonic potential spreading along an infi nite cable decays to a value of 0.37 of the value at the site of the input. It is referred to as the characteristic length of the cable. The higher the value of the specifi c membrane resistance, the higher the value of r m for that segment, the larger the value for l, and the greater the spread of electrotonic potential through that segment Most of the passive electrotonic current may be carried by K  "leak" channels, which are open at "rest" and are largely responsible for holding the cell at its resting potential. However, as mentioned earlier, many cells or regions within a cell are seldom at "rest" but are constantly active, in which case electrotonic current is carried by a variety of open channels. Thus, the effective R m can vary from values of less than 1000  cm 2 to more than 100,000  cm 2 in different neurons and in different parts of a neuron. Note that lambda varies with the square root of R m , so a 100-fold difference in R m translates into only a 10-fold difference in lambda.Conversely, the higher the value of the specifi c internal resistance, the higher the value of r i for that segment, the smaller the value of l, and the less the spread of electrotonic potential through that segment 1. Segments are cylinders. A segment is assumed to be a cylinder with constant radius. This is the simplest assumption however, compartmental simulations can readily incorporate different geometrical shapes with differing radii if needed 2. The electrotonic potential is due to a change in the membrane potential. At any instant of time, the "resting" membrane potential at any point on the neuron can be changed by several means: injection of current into the cell, extracellular currents that cross the membrane, and changes in membrane conductance. Electric current then begins to spread between that point and the rest of the neuron, in accord withwhere V is the electrotonic potential and V m is the changed membrane potential.Modern neurobiologists recognize that the membrane potential is rarely at rest. In practice, "resting" potential means the membrane potential at any given instant of time other than during an action potential or rapid synaptic potential.3. Electrotonic current is ohmic. Passive electrotonic current fl ow is usually assumed to be ohmic, i.e., in accord with the simple linear equationwhere E is the potential, I is the current, and R is the resistance.This relation is largely inferred from macroscopic measurements of the conductance of solutions having the composition of the intracellular medium, but rarely is measured directly for a given nerve process. Also largely untested is the likelihood that at the smallest dimensions, the processes and their internal organelles may acquire submicroscopic electrochemical properties that deviate signifi cantly from macroscopic fl uid conductance values compartmental models permit the incorporation of estimates of these properties.4. In the steady state, membrane capacitance is ignored. The simplest case of electrotonic spread occurs from the point on the membrane of a steady-state change so that time-varying properties due to the membrane capacitance can be ignored 5. The resting membrane potential can usually be ignored. In the simplest case, we consider the spread of electrotonic potential relative to a uniform resting potential so that the value of the resting potential can be ignored. Where the resting membrane potential may vary spatially, V must be defi ned for each segment as6. Electrotonic current divides between internal and membrane resistances. In the steady state, at any point on a process, current divides into two local resistance paths: further within the process through an internal resistance or across the membrane through a membrane resistance 7. Axial current is inversely proportional to diameter. Within the volume of the process, current is assumed to be distributed equally. Because resistances in parallel sum to decrease the overall resistance, axial current is inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area thus, a thicker process has a lower overall axial resistance than a thinner process. Because the axial resistance is assumed to be uniform throughout the process, the total cross-sectional axial resistance of a segment is represented by a single resistance,where r i is the internal resistance per unit length of r i cylinder, R i is the specifi c internal resistance, and A is the cross-sectional area.The internal structure of a process may contain membranous or fi lamentous organelles that can raise the effective internal resistance or provide high-conductance submicroscopic pathways that can lower it. In voltageclamp experiments, the space clamp eliminates current through r i , so that the only current remaining is through r m , thereby permitting isolation and analysis of different ionic membrane conductances, as in the original experiments of Hodgkin and Huxley 8. Membrane current is inversely proportional to membrane surface area. For a unit length of cylinder, the BOX 5.1membrane current and the membrane resistance are assumed to be uniform over the entire surface. Thus, by the same rule of the summing of parallel resistances, the membrane current is inversely proportional to the membrane area of the segment so that a thicker process has a lower overall membrane resistance. Thus,where r m is the membrane resistance for unit length of cylinder, R m is the specifi c membrane resistance, and c is the circumference. For a segment, the entire membrane resistance is regarded as concentrated at one point that is, there is no axial current fl ow within a segment but only between segments Membrane current passes through ion channels in the membrane. The density and types of these channels vary in different processes and indeed may vary locally in different segments and branches. These differences are incorporated readily into compartmental representations of the processes.9. The external medium along the process is assumed to have zero resistivity. In contrast with the internal axial resistivity, which is relatively high because of the small dimensions of most nerve processes, the external medium has a relatively low resistivity for current because of its relatively large volume. For this reason, the resistivity of the paths either along a process or to ground generally is regarded as negligible, and the potential outside the membrane is assumed to be everywhere equivalent to ground Compartmental models can simulate any arbitrary distribution of properties, including signifi cant values for extracellular resistance where relevant. Particular cases in which external resistivity may be large, such as the special membrane caps around synapses on the cell body or axon hillock of a neuron, can be addressed by suitable representation in the simulations. However, for most simulations, the assumption of negligible external resistance is a useful simplifying fi rst approximation.10. Driving forces on membrane conductances are assumed to be constant. It usually is assumed that ion concentrations across the membrane are constant during activity.Changes in ion concentrations with activity may occur, particularly in constricted extracellular or intracellular compartments these changes may cause deviations from the assumptions of constant driving forces for the membrane currents, as well as the assumption of uniform E r . For example, accumulations of extracellular K  may change local E, and intracellular accumulations of ions within the tiny volumes of spine heads may change the driving force on synaptic currents. These special properties are easily included in most compartmental models.11. Cables have different boundary conditions. In classical electrotonic theory, a cable such as one used for long-distance telecommunication is very long and can be considered of infi nite length. This assumption carries over to the application of cable theory to long axons, but most dendrites are relatively short. This imposes boundary conditions on the solutions of the cable equations, which have very important effects on electrotonic spread.In highly branched dendritic trees, boundary conditions are diffi cult to deal with analytically but are readily represented in compartmental models.signifi cance of R i and R m depends greatly on the length of a given process, as will be seen shortly.The space constant depends not only on the internal and membrane resistance, but also on the diameter of a process Thus, if x  30 mm, then L  30 mm4.5 mm  7. The electrotonic potential decays to a small percentage of the original value by only three characteristic lengths A reason often given for why the nervous system needs action potentials is that they overcome the severe attenuation of passively spreading potentials that occurs over the considerable lengths required for transmission of signals by axons. This applies to the long axons of projection neurons, but not necessarily to shorter axons and their collaterals. Recent studies in fact have revealed that excitatory synaptic potentials in the soma may spread through the axon to reach terminal boutons onto nearby cells the variable amount of synaptic depolarization thus acts as an analog signal to modify the digital signaling carried by the axonal action potentials. This mechanism has been shown in the mossy fi ber terminals of dentate granule cells onto CA3 pyramidal cells in the hippocampus A reverse situation is seen in the retina, where a particular type of horizontal cell has elaborate branches of both its dendrites and its terminal axon, interconnected by a long thin axon. Physiological studies have shown that each branching system processes different properties of the visual signal, but they do not interact, because the axon has passive properties that give it a short length constant. This enables one cell to provide two distinct input-output processing systems. Note, again, that the relation to l is the square root thus, over a 10-fold difference in diameter, the difference in l is only about three-fold Application of classical cable theory to neuronal processes assumes that the processes are infi nitely long. However, because neuronal processes have fi nite lengths, the length of a given process must be compared with l to assess the extent to which l accurately describes the actual electrotonic spread in that process. One of the largest processes in any nervous system, the squid giant Passive spread of electrical potential along the cell membrane underlies all types of electrical signaling in the neuron. It is thus the foundation for understanding the interactive substrate whereby the neuron can generate, receive, integrate, encode, and send signals.Electrotonic spread shares properties with electrical transmission through electrical cables the mathematical study of cable transmission has put these properties on a quantitative basis. The theoretical basis for extension of cable theory to complex dendritic trees has been developed in parallel with compartmental modeling methods for simulating dendritic signal processing.Cable theory depends on a number of reasonable simplifying assumptions about the geometry of neuronal processes and current fl ow within them. Steadystate electrotonus in dendrites depends on passive resistance of the membrane and of the internal cytoplasm and on the diameter and length of a nerve process.Until now, we have considered only the passive spread of steady-state inputs. However, the essence of many neural signals is that they change rapidly. In mammals, fast action potentials characteristically last from 1 to 5 ms, and fast synaptic potentials last from 5 to 30 ms. How do the electrotonic properties affect spread of these rapid signalsRapid signal spread depends not only on all the factors discussed thus far, but also on the membrane capacitance, which is due to the lipid moiety of the plasma membrane. Classically, the value of the specifi c membrane capacitance has been considered to be 1 mF cm 2 . However, a value of 0.6-0.75 mF cm 2 is now preferred for the lipid moiety itself, with the remainder being due to gating charges on membrane proteins The simplest case demonstrating the effect of membrane capacitance on transient signals is that of a single segment or a cell body with no processes. This is a very unrealistic assumption, equivalent to the single node of neural network models, but a simple starting point. In the equivalent electrical circuit for a neural process, the membrane capacitance is placed in parallel with ohmic components of the membrane conductance and the driving potentials for ion fl ows through those conductances  These "on" and "off" transients are shown in These spatial and temporal cable properties can be combined in a two-compartment model In the simplest case, current is injected into one of the compartments, as in an electrophysiological experiment. Positive charge injected into compartment A attempts to fl ow outward across the membrane, partially opposing the negative charge on the inside of the lipid membrane, thereby depolarizing the membrane capacitance at that site. At the same time, FIGURE 5.5 The equivalent circuit of a single isolated compartment responds to an injected current step by charging and discharging along a time course determined by the time constant, t. In actuality, because nerve cell segments are parts of longer processes or larger branching trees, the actual time courses of charging or discharging are modifi ed. V steady-state voltage I m , injected current applied to membrane I c , current through the capacitance I i , current through the ionic leak conductance m, membrane time constant. From The equivalent circuit of two neighboring compartments or segments of an axon or dendrite shows the pathways for current spread in response to an input at segment A. See text for full explanation.the charge begins to fl ow as current across the membrane through the resistance of the ionic membrane channels Thus, the two cases start with different means of transferring positive charge within the cell, but from that point the current paths and the associated spread of the electrotonic potential are similar. The electrotonic current that spreads between the two segments is referred to as the local current. The charging transient in compartment A is faster than the time constant of the resting membrane this difference is due both to the conductance load of compartment B and to the fact that the imposed conductance increase in compartment A reduces the time constant of compartment A. This illustrates a critical point fi rst emphasized by Wilfrid In addition to the properties underlying steadystate electrotonus, passive spread of transient potentials depends on the membrane capacitance. Initiation of electrotonic spread by intracellular injection of a transient electrical current pulse produces an electrotonic potential that spreads by passive local currents from point to point. It is more attenuated in amplitude than the steady-state case as it spreads along an axon or dendrite due to the low-pass fi ltering action of the membrane capacitance. Simultaneous current pulses at that site or other sites produce potentials that add linearly because the passive properties are invariant. However, transient conductance changes, as in synaptic responses, generate electrotonic potentials that do not sum linearly because of the nonlinear interactions of the conductances.We next apply our knowledge of electrotonic current properties to propagation of an action potential in an unmyelinated axon, that is, one that is not surrounded by myelin or other membranes that restrict the spread of extracellular current. Details on the ionic mechanisms of the nerve impulse can be found in Chapter 6. The local current spreading through the internal resistance to the neighboring compartment enables the action potential to propagate along the membrane of the axon. The rate of propagation is determined by both the passive cable properties and the kinetics of the action potential mechanism.Each of the cable properties is relevant in specifi c ways. For brief signals such as the action potential, C m is critical in controlling the rate of change of the membrane potential. For long processes such as axons, R i increasingly opposes electrotonic current fl ow as the value of r i increases beyond the characteristic length l, whereas the effect of r m decreases, due to the increased membrane area for parallel current paths. This effect is greater in thinner axons, which have shorter characteristic lengths. Finally, R m is a parame-ter that can vary widely. Thus, each of these parameters must be assessed in order to understand the exquisite effects of passive variables on the rates of impulse propagation in axons.A high value of R m , for example, forces current further along the membrane, increasing the characteristic length and consequently the spread of electrotonic potential, as we have seen however, at the same time, it increases the membrane time constant, thus slowing the response of a neighboring compartment to a rapid change. Increasing the diameter of the axon lowers the effective internal resistance of a compartment, thereby also increasing the characteristic length, but without a concomitant effect on the time constant. Thus, changing the diameter is a direct way of affecting the rate of impulse propagation through changes in passive electrotonic properties. The conduction rate of any given axon depends on the particular combination of these properties The effects of these passive properties on impulse velocity also depend on other factors. For example, on the basis of the cable equations, we can show that the conduction velocity should be related to the square root of the diameter The evolution of larger brains to control larger bodies and more complex behavior required communication over longer distances within the brain and body. This requirement placed a premium on the ability of axons to conduct impulses as rapidly as possible. As noted in the preceding section, a direct way of increasing the rate of conduction is by increasing the diameter, but larger diameters mean fewer axons within a given space, and complex be havior must be mediated by many axons. Another way of increasing the rate of conduction is to make the kinetics of the impulse mechanism faster that is, to make the rate of increase in Na  conductance with increasing membrane depolarization faster. The Hodgkin-Huxley equations for the action potential in mammalian nerves in fact have this faster rate.As we have seen, the rapid spread of local currents is promoted by an increase in R m but is opposed by an associated increase in the time constant. What is needed is an increase in R m with a concomitant decrease in C m . This is brought about by putting more resistances in series with the membrane resistance while putting more capacitances in series with the membrane capacitance. The way the nervous system does this is through a special satellite cell called a Schwann cell, a type of glial cell. As described in Chapters 3 and 4, Schwann cells wrap many layers of their plasma membranes around an axon. The membranes contain special constituents and together are called myelin. Myelinated nerves contain the fastest conducting axons in the nervous system. A general empirical fi nding known as the Hursh factor As discussed in Chapter 4, myelinated axons are not myelinated along their entire length at regular intervals, the myelin covering is interrupted by a node of Ranvier. The node has a complex structure. The density of voltage sensitive Na  channels at the node is high, whereas it is very low in the internodal membrane. This difference in density means that the impulse actively is generated only at the node the impulse jumps, so to speak, from node to node, and the process therefore is called saltatory conduction. A myelinated axon therefore resembles a passive cable with active booster stations.In rapidly conducting axons the impulse may extend over considerable lengths for example, in a 20-mmdiameter axon conducting at 120 ms 1 , at any instant of time an impulse of 1-ms duration extends over a 120-mm length of axon, which includes more than 100 nodes of Ranvier. It is therefore more appropriate to conceive that the impulse is generated simultaneously by many nodes, with their summed local currents spreading to the next adjacent nodes to activate them.The specifi c membrane resistance at the node is estimated to be only 50  cm 2 , due to a large number of open ionic channels at rest. This value of R m reduces the time constant of the nodal membrane to approximately 50 ms, which enables the nodal membrane to charge and discharge quickly, aiding rapid impulse generation greatly. For axons of equal cross-sectional area, myelination is estimated to increase the impulse conduction rate 100-fold.In all axons, a critical relation exists between the amount of local current spreading down an adjacent axon and the threshold for opening Na  channels in the membrane of the adjacent axon so that propagation of the impulse can continue. This introduces the notion of a safety factor-the amount by which the electrotonic potential exceeds the threshold for activating the impulse. The safety factor must protect against a wide range of operating conditions, including adaptation, fatigue, injury, infection, degeneration, and aging.Normally, an excess of local current ensures an adequate margin of safety against these factors. In the squid axon, the safety factor ranges from 4 to 5. In myelinated axons, an exquisite matching between internodal electrotonic properties and nodal active properties ensures that the electrotonic potential reaching a node has an adequate amplitude and the node has suffi cient Na  channels to generate an action potential that will spread to the next node. The safety factors for myelinated axons range from 5 to 10. Thus, the interaction of passive and active properties underlies the safety factors for impulse propagation in axons. Similar considerations apply to the orthodromic spread of signals in dendritic branches and the back-propagation of action potentials from the axon hillock into the soma and dendrites.Theoretically, the conduction velocity, space constant, and impulse wavelength of myelinated fi bers scale linearly with fi ber diameter Impulses propagate continuously through unmyelinated fi bers because the local currents spread directly to neighboring sites on the membrane. The rate of propagation is determined directly by the electrotonic properties of the fi ber. In myelinated axons, the impulse propagates discontinuously from node to node. The electrotonic properties of both the nodal and internodal regions determine not only the rate of impulse propagation, but also the safety factor for impulse transmission.Here and in Chapter 12, it will contribute to clarity to distinguish between passive spread and active propagation.It is important to distinguish between passive and active spread of potentials, which is helped by using different terms. Based on common dictionary defi nitions, "spreading" has a more general meaning of distributing something over an area or along an object. It applies specifi cally to passive electronic "spread" and to the local circuit currents that spread before an action potential, and can also be used in a general way to refer to spread of the action potential itself. "Conduction" also has a general meaning in the electrical sense. In contrast, "propagating" refers specifically to the action potential, because it carries the dictionary meaning of spreading by sequential active processes of reproducing oneself, which is what an action potential does along an axon or dendrite.These distinctions of meaning as applied to nervous conduction date from the work of Wilfrid Rall in the 1960s, and continue to be useful.Dendrites are the main neuronal compartment for the reception of synaptic inputs. The spread of synaptic responses through the dendritic tree depends critically on the electrotonic properties of the dendrites. Because dendrites are branching structures, understanding the rules governing dendritic electrotonus and the resulting integration of synaptic responses in dendrites is much more diffi cult than understanding the rules of simple spread in a single axon.As noted earlier, compared with axons, dendrites are relatively short, and their length becomes an important factor in assessing their electrotonic properties. Consider, in the mammalian nervous system, a moderately thin dendrite of 1 mm that has a typical R m of 60,000  cm 2 and an R i of 240  cm. Inserting these values into the equation for characteristic length gives a l of approximately 790 mm. This illustrates that lambda tends to be relatively long in comparison with the actual lengths of the dendrites in other words, because of the relatively high membrane resistance, the electrotonic spread of potentials is relatively effective within a dendritic branching tree.This essential property underlies the integration of signals in dendrites. The effective spread immediately leads to a second property. The assumption of infi nite length no longer holds dendritic branches are bounded by their terminations on the one hand, and the nature of their branching on the other. These are termed boundary conditions. The spread of electrotonic potentials is therefore exquisitely sensitive to the boundary conditions of the dendrites.This problem is approached most easily by considering two extreme types of termination of a dendritic branch. First, consider that at x  l the branch ends in a sealed end with infi nite resistance. In this case, the axial component of the current can spread no further and must therefore seek the only path to ground, which is across the membrane of the cylinder. This current is added to the current already crossing the membrane in the equation for Ohms law, I is increased, giving a larger E. The membrane will thus be more depolarized up to the terminal point a in fact, near point a, axial current is negligible and almost all the current is across the membrane, which amounts to a virtual space clamp At the other extreme, consider that at point , a small dendritic branch opens out into a very large conductance. Examples are, in the extreme, a hole in the membrane less extreme are a very small dendritic branch on a large soma and a small twig or spine on a large dendritic branch. Recall that large processes sum their resistances in parallel, which gives low current density and small voltage changes. Therefore, a current spreading through the high resistance of a small branch into a large branch encounters a very low resistance. For steady-state current spread, this situation is referred to as a large conductance load for a transient current, we refer to it as a low impedance.This introduces the key principle of impedance matching between interacting compartments, an important principle generally in biological systems. In our example, an impedance mismatch exists between the high impedance thin branch and the lower impedance thick branch. This mismatch reduces any voltage change due to the current and, in the extreme, effectively clamps the membrane to the resting potential at that point. The electrotonic potential thus is attenuated through the branch much more rapidly than would be predicted by the characteristic length All the different types of branching found in neuronal dendrites lie between these two extremes, with a corresponding range of boundary conditions at x  . Consider a segment of dendrite that divides into two branches at x  . We can appreciate intuitively that the amount of spread of electrotonic potential into the two branches will be governed by the factors just considered. One possibility is that the two branches have very small diameters, so their input impedance is higher than that of the segment in this case, the situation will tend toward the sealed end case For many cases of dendritic branching, the input impedance of the branches is between the two extremes We are now in a position to assess the effects of cable properties on the time course of the spread of synaptic potentials through dendritic branches and trees. Consider in Although the synaptic potentials thus decrease in amplitude as they spread, the rate of electrotonic spread can be calculated in terms of the half-amplitude at any point. If distance is expressed in units of l and time in units of t, then for spread through a semiinfi nite cable, we have the simple equation Thus, if we ignore boundary effects, for the 10-mm process mentioned earlier in which l  1500 and t  10 ms, the velocity of spread would be 0.3 ms 1 , or 300 mm ms 1 . It can be seen that electrotonic spread can be relatively fast over short distances within a dendritic tree but is very slow in comparison with impulse transmission for an axon of this diameter. Thus, both the severe decrement and the slow velocity make passive spread by itself ineffective for transmission over long distances. These general rules of delay and attenuation govern the passive spread of all transient potentials in dendritic branches and trees. As a rule of thumb, spread within one space constant The spread of electrotonic potential from a point of input involves the equalization of charge on the membrane throughout the system. After cessation of the input, a time is reached when charge has become equalized and the entire system is equipotential from this time on, the remaining electrotonic potential decays equally at every point in the system. This time is indicated by the vertical arrow in What is the spread of the postsynaptic potential throughout the system when a synaptic input is delivered to only a single terminal dendritic branch For a transient synaptic input, a third factormembrane capacitance-must be taken into account. The small surface area of a terminal branch has little capacitance, so the amplitude of a transient response differs little from a steady-state response in the branch. However, in spreading out from a small process, the transient synaptic potential is attenuated by the impedance mismatch between the process and the rest of the dendritic tree. Spread of the transient through the dendritic tree is attenuated further by to the initial potential at the site of input, spreads from the distal branch through the dendritic tree, with a large decrement into the parent branch but a small decrement into neighboring branches B, C-1, and C-2. The resulting potential in the soma is much reduced, as is the response to the same input delivered directly to the soma. The dashed line indicates the response when the same amount of current is injected into the soma. For transient input to a distal branch, transient electrotonic potentials decrease sharply in amplitude and are delayed and slower as they spread toward the soma through the parent, grandparent, and great-grandparent branches, eventually reaching the soma and output trunk. Modifi ed from Segev based on Ralland the need to charge the capacitance of the dendritic membrane and is slowed by the time taken for the charging. The amount of slowing is so precise that the relative distance of a synapse in the dendritic tree from the soma can be calculated from experimental measurements in the soma of the time to peak of the recorded synaptic potential These considerations show that, compared with the anatomical structure of a dendritic system, which is relatively fi xed over short periods of time, the electrotonic structure continually shifts over time, producing complex effects on signal integration. The effects refl ect different relations between the electrotonic and signaling properties, such as the direction of signal spread, inhomogeneities in passive properties, rates of signal transfer, and interactions between synaptic or active conductances, to name a few. The effects can be illustrated in graphic fashion for the entire soma-dendritic system by taking a stained neuron and modifying its size according to its electrotonic properties. This is termed a morphoelectrotonic transform or neuromorphic transform.We illustrate three types of neuromorphic transforms, beginning with the direction of signal spread. The analysis in The electrotonic structure of a neuron is not necessarily fi xed, but may vary under synaptic control. Our fi nal example is shown in The electrotonic structure of a neuron can vary with shifts in the resting membrane potential. In this medium spiny cell, the electrotonic transform varies with the resting membrane potential, which in turn refl ects the combination of resting voltage-gated K  currents and excitatory synaptic currents. See text. From Dynamic interactions also occur between synaptic conductances. It often is assumed that synaptic responses sum linearly, but we have already noted that this is not generally true. In an electrical cable, responses to simultaneous current inputs sum linearly because the cable properties remain invariant at all times. However, as noted in relation to This effect is illustrated by the two-compartment model of These properties mean that, as noted earlier, synaptic integration in dendrites in general is not linear even for purely passive electrotonic properties. The further apart the synaptic sites, the fewer the interactions between the conductances, and the more linear the summation becomes In electrophysiological recordings from the cell body, dendritic synaptic responses often appear small and slow actions ultimately produces signifi cant effects on signal integration at the cell body. These properties will be considered further in Chapter 12.In addition to their role in local signal processing, the cable properties of the neuron are also important for controlling the spread of synaptic potentials from the dendrites through the soma to the site of action potential initiation in the axon hillock initial segment and back-propagation of an action potential into the soma-dendritic compartments, where it can activate dendritic outputs and interact with the active properties involved in signal processing. These properties are discussed further in Chapter 12.The rules governing electrotonic interactions within a dendritic tree also apply at the level of a spine, the smallest process of a nerve cell. A spine may vary from a bump on a dendritic branch to a twig to a lollipopshaped process several micrometers long Dendritic spines receive most of the excitatory inputs to pyramidal neurons in the cerebral cortex and to Purkinje cells in the cerebellum, as well as to a variety of other neuron types, so an understanding of their properties is critical for understanding brain function In addition to its electrotonic properties, the spine may have interesting biochemical properties. The same cable equations that govern electrotonic properties also have their counterparts in describing the diffusion of substances. Thus, as already noted, accumulations of only small numbers of ions are needed within the tiny volumes of spine heads to change the driving force on an ion species or to affect signifi cant changes in the concentrations of subsequent second messengers. This interest is intensifying, as the ability to image ion fl uxes, such as for Ca 2 , and to measure other molecular properties of individual spines increases with new technology such as two-photon microscopy. The interpretation of those results for the integrative properties of the neuron will require considerations in the biochemical domain that parallel those discussed in the electrotonic domain. The range of properties and possible functions of spines are discussed further in Chapter 12.In addition to membrane properties, the spread of electrotonic potentials in branching dendritic trees is dependent on the boundary conditions set by the modes of branching and termination within the tree. In general, other parts of the dendritic tree constitute a conductance load on activity at a given site the spread of activity from that site is determined by the impedance match or mismatch between that site and the neighboring sites. Rules governing these impedance relations have been worked out relative to the case in which the sum of the daughter branch diameters raised to the 32 power is equal to that of the parent branch, in which case the system of branches is an "equivalent cylinder," resembling a single continuous cable. This provides a starting point in analyzing synaptic integration, which can be adapted for different types of branching patterns in terms of "equivalent dendrites."Synchronous synaptic potentials in several branches spread relatively effectively through most dendritic trees. Responses in individual branches may be relatively isolated because of the decrement of passive spread and require local active boosting for effective communication with the rest of the tree. Passive spread A B C can be characterized in terms of several measures, including characteristic length of the equivalent cylinder. There is scaling within individual branches, such that electrotonic in fi ner branches spread is relatively effective over their shorter lengths. Integration of synaptic potentials in passive dendrites is fundamentally nonlinear because of interactions between the synaptic conductances. The rules for electrotonic spread in dendrites are the basis for understanding the contributions of active properties of dendrites.We can now begin to gain insight into the relation between passive and active potentials in a neuron. We consider a model, the olfactory mitral cell, in which we apply the principles of this chapter and look forward to the principles underlying active properties in Chapter 12.A basic problem is to understand the factors that decide where the action potential will be initiated with different levels of excitatory or inhibitory inputs. The possible sites are anywhere from the axon through the soma to the most distal dendrites. The mitral cell is advantageous for this analysis because all the excitatory synaptic input is through olfactory nerve terminals that make their synapses on the distal dendritic tuft and because the primary dendrite that connects the tuft to the cell body is an unbranched cylinder. Applying depolarizing current to distal dendrite or soma, the experimental fi ndings were counterintuitive: with weak distal inputs the action potential initiation site is far away, in the axon, but with increasing excitation it shifts to the distal dendrite, as illustrated in b. Low total membrane capacitance. The small size also means a small total membrane capacitance, implying that synaptic potentials may be rapid this means that spines on dendrites can potentially be involved in rapid information transmission.c. Increases in total dendritic membrane capacitance. Although the membrane capacitance of an individual spine is small, the combined spine population increases the total capacitance of its parent dendrite. This increases the fi ltering effect of the dendrite on transmission of signals through it.d. Decrement of potentials spreading from the spine. There is an impedance mismatch between the spine head and its parent dendrite this means that potentials spreading from the spine to the dendrite will suffer considerable decrement unless there are active properties of the dendrite or of neighboring spines to boost the signal.e. Ease of potential spread into the spine. The other side of the impedance mismatch is that membrane potential changes within the dendrite spread into the spine with little decrement thus, the spine tends to follow the potential of its dendrite, except for the transient largeamplitude responses to its own synaptic input. This means that a spine can serve as a coincidence detector for nearby synaptic responses or for an action potential backpropagating into the dendritic tree.f. Linearization of synaptic integration. The spine necks increase the anatomical and electrotonic distance between the spine synapses, thereby decreasing the interactions between their conductances, producing more linear superposition of the postsynaptic responses.  This is much too complex a problem to solve in your head or with "back of the envelope" calculations. The only effective method is a realistic computational simulation. A compartmental model of the mitral cell was therefore constructed, with Na  and K  conductances scaled to the structure of the mitral cell. Fitting of computed with experimental responses was carried out under stringent constraints, with minimization of eight simultaneous simulations We will analyze the active properties in Chapter 12 here we focus on fi tting the passive properties. Two steps were essential. First, each experimental recording began with a period of passive charging of the mitral cell membrane The computational simulations thus show precisely how the interactions of passive and active potentials control the sites of action potential initiation in the neuron. This is a model for the complex integrative properties of the neuron, which are explored further in Chapter 12.Through the operation of ionic pumps and special ionic buffering mechanisms, neurons actively maintain precise internal concentrations of several important ions, including Na  , K  , Cl  , and Ca 2 . The mechanisms by which they do so are illustrated in Ions tend to move down their concentration gradients through specialized ionic pores, known as ionic channels, in the plasma membrane. Through simple laws of thermodynamics, the high concentration of K  inside glial cells, neurons, and axons results in a tendency for K  ions to diffuse down their concentration gradient and leave the cell or cell process To illustrate, let us consider the passive distribution of K  ions in the squid giant axon as studied by Hodgkin and Huxley. The K  concentration K   inside the squid giant axon is about 400 mM, whereas the K   outside the axon is about 20 mM. Because K   i is greater than K   o , potassium ions will tend to fl ow down their concentration gradient, taking positive charge with them. The equilibrium potential  causes the membrane potential to become more negative, or hyperpolarized, due to the exiting of positively charged ions from inside the cell Voltage Gradient  Neurons actively concentrate K  inside the cell. These K  ions tend to fl ow down their concentration gradient from inside to outside the cell. However, the negative membrane potential inside the cell provides an attraction for K  ions to enter or remain within the cell. These two factors balance one another at the equilibrium potential, which in a typical mammalian neuron is 102 mV for K  .6. MEMBRANE POTENTIAL AND ACTION POTENTIALAt membrane potentials negative to 102 mV, K  ions tend to fl ow into the cell increasing the membrane conductance to K  causes the membrane potential to become more positive, or depolarized, due to the fl ow of positive charge into the cell. The membrane potential at which the net current "fl ips" direction is referred to as the reversal potential. If the channels conduct only one type of ion, then the reversal potential and the Nernst equilibrium potential for that ion coincide The exiting and entering of the cell by K  ions during generation of the membrane potential gives rise to a curious problem. When K  ions leave the cell to generate a membrane potential, the concentration of K  changes both inside and outside the cell. Why does this change in concentration not alter the equilibrium potential, thus changing the tendency for K  ions to fl ow down their concentration gradient The reason is that the number of K  ions required to leave the cell to achieve the equilibrium potential is quite small. For example, if a cell were at 0 mV and the membrane suddenly became permeable to K  ions, only about 10 12 mol of K  ions per square centimeter of membrane would move from inside to outside the cell in bringing the membrane potential to the equilibrium potential for K  . In a spherical cell of 25 mm diameter, this would amount to an average decrease in intracellular K  of only about 4 mM. However, there are instances when signifi cant changes in the concentrations of K  may occur, particularly during the generation of pronounced activity, such as an epileptic seizure. During the occurrence of a tonicclonic generalized seizure, large numbers of neurons discharge throughout the cerebral cortex in a synchronized manner. This synchronous discharge of large numbers of neurons signifi cantly increases the extracellular K  concentration, by as much as a couple of millimoles, resulting in a commensurate positive shift in the equilibrium potential for K  . This shift in the equilibrium potential can increase the excitability of affected neurons and neuronal processes and thus promote the spread of the seizure activity. Fortunately, the extracellular concentration of K  is tightly regulated and is kept at normal levels through uptake by glial cells, as well as by diffusion through the fl uid of the extracellular space.As is true for K  ions, each of the membrane-permeable species of ions possesses an equilibrium potential that depends on the concentration of that ion inside and outside the cell. Thus, equilibrium potentials may The equilibrium potential is determined by the concentration of the ion inside and outside the cell, the temperature of the solution, the valence of the ion, and the amount of work required to separate a given quantity of charge. The equation that describes the equilibrium potential was formulated by a German physical chemist named Walter Nernst in 1888:Here, E ion is the membrane potential at which the ionic species is at equilibrium, R is the gas constant vary between different cell types, such as those found in animals adapted to live in salt water versus mammalian neurons. In mammalian neurons, the equilibrium potential is approximately 56 mV for Na  , approximately 76 mV for Cl  , and about 125 mV for Ca 2 If a membrane is permeable to only one ion and no electrogenic ionic pumps are operating, then the membrane potential is necessarily at the equilibrium potential for that ion. At rest, the plasma membrane of most cell types is not at the equilibrium potential for K  ions, indicating that the membrane is also permeable to other types of ions. For example, the resting membrane of the squid giant axon is permeable to Cl  and Na  , as well as K  , due to the presence of ionic channels that not only allow these ions to pass but also are open at the resting membrane potential. Because the membrane is permeable to K  , Cl  , and Na  , the resting potential of the squid giant axon is not equal to E K , E Na , or E Cl , but is somewhere in between these three. A membrane permeable to more than one ion has a steady-state membrane potential whose value is between those of the equilibrium potentials for each of the permeant ions.Intracellular recordings from neurons in the mammalian central nervous system reveal that different types of neurons exhibit different resting membrane potentials. Indeed, some types of neurons do not even exhibit a true "resting" membrane potential they spontaneously and continuously generate action potentials even in the total lack of synaptic input. In the visual system, intracellular recordings have shown that photoreceptor cells of the retina-the rods and cones-have a membrane potential of approximately 40 mV at rest and are hyperpolarized when activated by light. Cells in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus, which receive axonal input from the retina and project to the visual cortex, have a resting membrane potential of approximately 70 mV during sleep and 55 mV during waking, whereas pyramidal neurons of the visual cortex have a resting membrane potential of about 75 mV. Presumably, the resting membrane potentials of different cell types in the central and peripheral nervous system are highly regulated and are functionally important. For example, the depolarized membrane potential of photoreceptors presumably allows the membrane potential to move in both negative and positive directions in response to changes in light intensity. The hyperpolarized membrane potential of thalamic neurons during sleep dramatically decreases the fl ow of information from the sensory periphery to the cerebral cortex,Positive to E Opening K  channels increases the conductance of the membrane to K  , denoted gK. If the membrane potential is positive to the equilibrium potential for K  , then increasing gK will cause some K  ions to leave the cell, and the cell will become hyperpolarized. If the membrane potential is negative to E K when gK is increased, then K  ions will enter the cell, therefore making the inside more positive. If the membrane potential is exactly E K when gK is increased, then there will be no net movement of K  ions. Opening K  channels when the membrane potential is at E K does not change the membrane potential however, it reduces the ability of other ionic currents to move the membrane potential away from E K . For example, a comparison of the ability of the injection of two pulses of current, one depolarizing and one hyperpolarizing, to change the membrane potential before and after opening K  channels reveals that increases in gK decrease the responses of the cell noticeably.presumably to allow the cortex to be relatively undisturbed during sleep, and the 20-mV membrane potential between the resting potential and the action potential threshold in cortical pyramidal cells allows these cells to be strongly infl uenced by subthreshold barrages of synaptic potentials from other cortical neurons.Because the resting membrane potential of a neuron is not at the equilibrium potential for any particular ion, ions constantly fl ow down their concentration gradients. This fl ux becomes considerably larger with the generation of electrical and synaptic potentials because ionic channels are opened by these events. Although the absolute number of ions traversing the plasma membrane during each action potential or synaptic potential may be small in individual cells, the collective infl uence of a large neural network of cells, such as in the brain, and the presence of ion fl uxes even at rest can substantially change the distribution of ions inside and outside neurons. Cells have solved this problem with the use of active transport of ions against their concentration gradients. The proteins that actively transport ions are referred to as ionic pumps, of which the Na  -K  pump is perhaps the most thoroughly understood The Na  -K  pump consists of two subunits, a and b, arranged in a tetramer 2 . The Na  -K  pump is believed to operate through conformational changes that alternatively expose a Na  -binding site to the interior of the cell and a K  binding site to the extracellular fl uid The membranes of neurons and glia contain multiple types of ionic pumps, used to maintain the proper distribution of each ionic species important for cellular signaling. Many of these pumps are operated by the Na  gradient across the cell, whereas others operate through a mechanism similar to that of the Na  -K  An equation developed by Goldman and later used by Alan Hodgkin and Bernard Katz describes the steady-state membrane potential for a given set of ionic concentrations inside and outside the cell and the relative permeabilities of the membrane to each of those ions:The relative contribution of each ion is determined by its concentration differences across the membrane and the relative permeability of the membrane to each type of ion. If a membrane is permeable to only one ion, then the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation reduces to the Nernst equation. In the squid giant axon, at resting membrane potential, the permeability ratios are p K : p Na : p Cl  1.00 : 0.04 : 0.45.The membrane of the squid giant axon, at rest, is most permeable to K  ions, less so to Cl  , and least permeable to Na  . These results indicate that the resting membrane potential is determined by the resting permeability of the membrane to K  , Na  , and Cl  . In theory, this resting membrane potential may be anywhere between E K and E Na. For the three ions at 20C, the equation is This suggests that the squid giant axon should have a resting membrane potential of 62 mV. In fact, the resting membrane potential may be a few millivolts hyperpolarized to this value through the operation of the electrogenic Na  -K  pump. pump. For example, the calcium concentration inside neurons is kept to very low levels through the operation of both types of ionic pumps, as well as special intracellular Ca 2 buffering mechanisms. Ca 2 is extruded from neurons through both a Ca 2 , Mg 2 -ATPase, and a Na  -Ca 2 exchanger. The Na  -Ca 2 exchanger is driven by the Na  gradient across the membrane and extrudes one Ca 2 ion for each Na  ion allowed to enter the cell.The Cl  concentration in neurons is actively maintained at a low level through operation of a chloridebicarbonate exchanger, which brings in one ion of Na  and one ion of HCO 3  for each ion of Cl  extruded. Intracellular pH can also markedly affect neuronal excitability and is therefore tightly regulated, in part by a Na  -H  exchanger that extrudes one proton for each Na  allowed to enter the cell.The membrane potential is generated by the unequal distribution of ions, particularly K  , Na  , and Cl  , across the plasma membrane. This unequal distribution of ions is maintained by ionic pumps and exchangers. K  ions are concentrated inside the neuron and tend to fl ow down their concentration gradient, leading to a hyperpolarization of the cell. At the equilibrium potential, the tendency of K  ions to fl ow out of the cell will be exactly offset by the tendency of K  ions to enter the cell due to the attraction of the negative potential inside the cell. The resting membrane is also permeable to Na  and Cl  and therefore the resting membrane potential is approximately 75 to 40 mV, in other words, substantially positive to E K .An Increase in Na  and K  Conductance Generates Action Potentials Another compound, tetraethylammonium, is a useful pharmacological tool for selectively blocking I K Hodgkin and Huxley proposed that K  channels possess a voltage-sensitive "gate" that opens by depolarization and closes by the subsequent repolarization of the membrane potential. This process of "turning on" and "turning off" the K  current came to be known as activation and deactivation. The Na  current also exhibits voltage-dependent activation and deactivation In the voltage-clamp technique, two independent electrodes are inserted into the squid giant axon: one for recording the voltage difference across the membrane and the other for intracellularly injecting the current By measuring the voltage sensitivity and kinetics of these two processes, activation-deactivation and inactivation-deinactivation of the Na  current, as well as the activation-deactivation of the delayed rectifi er K  current, Hodgkin and Huxley generated a series of mathematical equations that quantitatively described the generation of the action potential, then increasing the membrane potential from 60 to 0 mV results in only the outward current, which corresponds to I K . Subtracting I K from the recording in normal seawater illustrates the amplitude-time course of the inward Na  current, I Na . Note that I K activates more slowly than I Na and that I Na inactivates with time. From . These two ionic currents can also be isolated from one another through the use of pharmacological blockers. Increasing the membrane potential from 45 to 75 mV in 15-mV steps reveals the amplitude-time course of inward Na  and outward K  currents. After the block of I Na with the poison tetrodotoxin, increasing the membrane potential to positive levels activates I K only. After the block of I K with tetraethylammonium, increasing the membrane potential to positive levels activates I Na only. From . According to these early experimental and computational neuroscientists, the action potential is generated as follows. Depolarization of the membrane potential increases the probability of Na  channels being in the activated, but not yet inactivated, state. At a particular membrane potential, the resulting infl ow of Na  ions tips the balance of the net ionic current from outward to inward. At this membrane potential, known as the action potential threshold, the movement of Na  ions into the cell depolarizes the axon and opens more Na  channels, causing yet more depolarization of the membrane repetition of this process yields a rapid, positive feedback loop that brings the axon close to E Na .However, even as more and more Na  channels are becoming activated, some of these channels are also inactivating and therefore no longer conducting Na  ions. In addition, the delayed rectifi er K  channels are also opening, due to the depolarization of the membrane potential, and allowing positive charge to exit the cell. At some point, close to the peak of the action potential, the inward movement of Na  ions into the cell is exactly offset by the outward movement of K  ions out of the cell. After this point, the outward movement of K  ions dominates, and the membrane potential is repolarized, corresponding to the fall of the action potential. The persistence of the K  current for a few milliseconds following the action potential generates the after-hyperpolarization. During this after-hyperpolarization, which is lengthened by the membrane time constant, inactivation of the Na  channels is removed, preparing the axon for generation of the next action potential The occurrence of an action potential is not associated with substantial changes in the intracellular or extracellular concentrations of Na  or K  , as shown earlier for the generation of the resting membrane potential. For example, generation of a single action potential in a 25-mm-diameter hypothetical spherical cell should increase the intracellular concentration of Na  by only approximately 6 mM. Thus, the action potential is an electrical event generated by a change in the distribution of charge across the membrane and not by a marked change in the intracellular or extracellular concentration of Na  or K  .Neurons have complex morphologies including dendritic arbors, a cell body, and typically one axonal output, which branches extensively. In many cells, all these parts of the neuron are capable of independently generating action potentials. The activity of most neurons is dictated by barrages of synaptic potentials generated at each moment by a variable subset of the thousands of synapses impinging upon the cells dendrites and soma. Where then is the action potential initiated In most cells, each action potential is initiated in the initial portion of the axon, known as the axon initial segment dromically down the axon to the synaptic terminals, where it causes release of transmitter, as well as antidromically back through the cell body and into the cells dendrites, where it can modulate intracellular processes.The ability of depolarization to activate an action potential varies as a function of the time since the last generation of an action potential, due to the inactivation of Na  channels and the activation of K  channels. Immediately after the generation of an action potential, another action potential usually cannot be generated regardless of the amount of current injected into the axon. This period corresponds to the absolute refractory period and largely is mediated by the inactivation of Na  channels. The relative refractory period occurs during the action potential after-hyperpolarization and follows the absolute refractory period. The relative refractory period is characterized by a requirement for the increased injection of ionic current into the cell to generate another action potential and results from persistence of the outward K  current. The practical implication of refractory periods is that action potentials are not allowed to "reverberate" between the axon initial segment and axon terminals.Axons may be either myelinated or unmyelinated. Invertebrate axons or small vertebrate axons are typically unmyelinated, whereas larger vertebrate axons are often myelinated. As described in Chapter 4, sensory and motor axons of the peripheral nervous system are myelinated by specialized cells that form a spiral wrapping of multiple layers of myelin around the axon In unmyelinated axons, the Na  and K  channels taking part in action potential generation are distributed along the axon, and the action potential propagates along the length of the axon through local depolarization of each neighboring patch of membrane, causing that patch of membrane also to generate an action potential with an internode delay of only about 20 ms, referred to as saltatory conduction. Growing evidence indicates that, near the nodes of Ranvier and underneath the myelin covering, K  channels may play a role in determining the resting membrane potential and repolarization of the action potential. A cause of some neurological disorders, such as multiple sclerosis and Guillain-Barre syndrome, is the demyelination of axons, resulting in a block of conduction of the action potentials.The generation of ionic currents useful for the propagation of action potential requires the movement of signifi cant numbers of ions across the membrane in a relatively short time. The rate of ionic fl ow during the generation of an action potential is far too high to be achieved by an active transport mechanism and results instead from the opening of ion channels. Although the existence of ionic channels in the membrane has been postulated for decades, their properties and structure only recently have become known in detail. The powerful combination of electrophysiological and molecular techniques has enhanced our knowledge of the structure-function relations of ionic channels greatly Various neural toxins were particularly useful in the initial isolation of ionic channels. For example, three subunits of the voltage-dependent Na  channel were isolated with the use of a derivative of a scorpion toxin. The a subunit of the Na  channel is a Cells cannot survive without functional ion channels. It is therefore not surprising that an ever-increasing number of diseases have been found to be associated with defective ion channel function. There are a number of different mechanisms by which this may occur.1. Mutations in the coding region of ion channel genes may lead to gain or loss of channel function, either of which may have deleterious consequences. For example, mutations producing enhanced activity of the epithelial Na  channel are responsible for Liddles syndrome, an inherited form of hypertension, whereas other mutations in the same protein that cause reduced channel activity give rise to hypotension. The most common inherited disease in Caucasians is also an ion channel mutation. This disease is cystic fi brosis, which results from mutations in the epithelial chloride channel, known as CFTR. The most common mutation, deletion of a phenylalanine at position 508, results in defective processing of the protein and prevents it from reaching the surface membrane. CFTR regulates chloride fl uxes across epithelial cell membranes, and this loss of CFTR activity leads to reduced fl uid secretion in the lung, resulting in potentially fatal lung infections.2. Mutations in the promoter region of the gene may cause under-or overexpression of a given ion channel.3. Other diseases result from defective regulation of channel activity by cellular constituents or extracellular ligands. This defective regulation may be caused by mutations in the genes encoding the regulatory molecules themselves or defects in the pathways leading to their production. Some forms of maturity-onset diabetes of the young may be attributed to such a mechanism. ATP-sensitive potassium channels play a key role in the glucose-induced insulin secretion from pancreatic b cells, and their defective regulation is responsible for one form of MODY.4. Autoantibodies to channel proteins may cause disease by downregulating channel function-often by causing internalization of the channel protein itself. Wellknown examples are myasthenia gravis, which results from antibodies to skeletal muscle acetylcholine channels, and Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, in which patients produce antibodies against presynaptic Ca 2 channels.5. Finally, a number of ion channels are secreted by cells as toxic agents. They insert into the membrane of the target cell and form large nonselective pores, leading to cell lysis and death. The hemolytic toxin produced by the bacterium Staphylococcus aureus and the toxin secreted by the protozoan Entamoeba histolytica, which causes amebic dysentery, are examples.Natural mutations in ion channels have been invaluable for studying the relationship between channel structure and function. In many cases, genetic analysis of a BOX 6.4disease has led to the cloning of the relevant ion channel. The fi rst K  channel to be identifi ed, for example, came from the cloning of the gene that caused Drosophila to shake when exposed to ether. Likewise, the gene encoding the primary subunit of a cardiac potassium channel was identifi ed by positional cloning in families carrying mutations that caused a cardiac disorder known as long QT syndrome. Conversely, the large number of studies on the relationship between Na  channel structure and function has greatly assisted our understanding of how mutations in Na  channels produce their clinical phenotypes.Many diseases are genetically heterogeneous, and the same clinical phenotype may be caused by mutations in different genes. Long QT syndrome is a relatively rare inherited cardiac disorder that causes abrupt loss of consciousness, seizures, and sudden death from ventricular arrhythmia in young people. Mutations in fi ve different genes, two types of cardiac muscle K  channels and the cardiac muscle sodium channel, give rise to long QT syndrome. The disorder is characterized by a long QT interval in the electrocardiogram, which refl ects the delayed repolarization of the cardiac action potential. As therefore might be expected, mutations in the cardiac Na  channel gene that cause long QT syndrome enhance the Na  current, whereas those in potassium channel genes cause loss of function and reduce the K  current.Mutations in many different types of ion channels have been shown to cause human diseases. In addition to the examples listed earlier, mutations in water channels cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus mutations in gap junction channels cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and hereditary deafness mutations in the skeletal muscle Na  channel cause a range of disorders known as periodic paralyses mutations in intracellular Ca 2 -release channels cause malignant hyperthermia and mutations in neuronal voltage-gated Ca 2 channels cause migraine and episodic ataxia. The list increases daily. As is the case with all single gene disorders, the frequency of these diseases in the general population is very low. However, the insight they have provided into the relationship between ion channel structure and function, and into the physiological role of the different ion channels, has been invaluable. As William Harvey said in 1657 "nor is there any better way to advance the proper practice of medicine than to give our minds to the discovery of the usual form of nature, by careful investigation of the rarer forms of disease."  large glycoprotein with a molecular mass of 270 kDa, whereas the b1 and b2 subunits are smaller polypeptides of molecular masses 39 and 37 kDa, respectively The a subunit of the Na  channel contains four internal repetitions The mechanisms of inactivation of ionic channels have been analyzed with a combination of molecular and electrophysiological techniques. The most convincing hypothesis is that inactivation is achieved by a block of the inner mouth of the aqueous pore. Ionic channels are inactivated without detectable movement of ionic current through the membrane thus inactivation is probably not directly gated by changes in the membrane potential alone. Rather, inactivation is triggered or facilitated as a secondary consequence of activation. Site-directed mutagenesis or the use of antibodies has shown that the part of the molecule between regions III and IV may be allowed to move to block the cytoplasmic side of the ionic pore after the conformational change associated with activation.The fi rst intracellular recordings of action potentials in mammalian neurons by Sir John Eccles and colleagues revealed a remarkable similarity to those of the squid giant axon and gave rise to the assumption that the electrophysiology of neurons in the CNS was really rather simple: when synaptic potentials brought the membrane potential positive to action potential threshold, action potentials were produced through an increase in Na  conductance followed by an increase in K  conductance, as in the squid giant axon. The assumption, therefore, was that the complicated pat-terns of activity generated by the brain during the resting, sleeping, or active states were brought about as an interaction of the very large numbers of neurons present in the mammalian CNS. However, intracellular recordings of invertebrate neurons revealed that different cell types exhibit a wide variety of different electrophysiological behaviors, indicating that neurons may be signifi cantly more complicated than the squid giant axon.Elucidation of the basic electrophysiology and synaptic physiology of different types of neurons and neuronal pathways within the mammalian CNS was facilitated by the in vitro slice technique, in which thin slices of brain can be maintained for several hours. Intracellular recordings from identifi ed cells revealed that neurons of the mammalian nervous system, such as those of invertebrate networks, can generate complex patterns of action potentials entirely through intrinsic ionic mechanisms and without synaptic interaction with other cell types. For example, Rodolfo Llins and colleagues discovered that Purkinje cells of the cerebellum can generate highfrequency trains of Na  -and K  -mediated action potentials interrupted by Ca 2 spikes in the dendrites, whereas a major afferent to these neurons, the inferior olivary cell, can generate rhythmic sequences of broad action potentials only at low frequencies through an interaction between various Ca 2 , Na  , and K  conductances Although no uniform classifi cation scheme has been formulated in which all the different types of neurons of the brain can be classifi ed, a few characteristic patterns of activity seem to recur. The fi rst general class of action potential generation is characterized by those cells that generate trains of action potentials one spike at a time. The more prolonged the depolarization of these cells, the more prolonged their discharge. The more intensely these cells are depolarized, the higher the frequency of action potential generation. This type of relatively linear behavior is typical for brain stem and spinal cord motor neurons functioning in muscle contraction. A modifi cation of this basic pattern of "regular fi ring" is characterized by the generation of trains of action potentials that exhibit a marked tendency to slow down in frequency with time, a process known as spike frequency adaptation. Examples of cells that discharge in this manner are cortical and hippocampal pyramidal cells.In addition to these regular fi ring cells, many neurons in the central nervous system exhibit the intrinsic propensity to generate rhythmic bursts of action potentials Yet another general category of neurons in the brain comprises cells that generate relatively short duration action potentials and can discharge at relatively high frequencies. Such electrophysiological properties often are found in neurons that release the inhibitory amino acid g-aminobutyric acid Each of these unique intrinsic patterns of activity in the nervous system is due to the presence of a distinct mixture and distribution of different ionic currents in the cells. As in classical studies of the squid giant axon, these different ionic currents have been characterized, at least in part, with voltage-clamp and pharmacological techniques, and the basic electrophysiological properties have been replicated with computational simulations The search for the electrophysiological basis of the varying intrinsic properties of different types of neurons of vertebrates and invertebrates revealed a wide variety of ionic currents. Each type of ionic current is characterized by several features: the type of ions conducted by the underlying ionic channels, their voltage and time dependence, and their sensitivity to second messengers. In vertebrate neurons, two distinct Na  currents have been identifi ed and six distinct Ca 2 currents and more than seven distinct K  currents are known Depolarization of many different types of vertebrate neurons results not only in the activation of the rapidly activating and inactivating Na  current underlying action potential generation, but also in the rapid activation of a Na  current that does not inactivate and is therefore known as the "persistent" Na  current. The threshold for activation of the persistent Na  current is typically about 65 mV that is, below the threshold for the generation of action potentials. This property gives this current the interesting ability to enhance or facilitate the response of the neuron to depolarizing, yet subthreshold, inputs. For example, synaptic events that depolarize the cell will activate I Nap , resulting in an extra infl ux of positive charge and therefore a larger depolarization than otherwise would occur. Likewise, hyperpolarizations may result in deactivation of I Nap , again resulting in larger hyperpolarizations than otherwise would occur. In this manner, the persistent Na  current may play an important regulatory function in the control of the functional responsiveness of the neuron to synaptic inputs and may contribute to the dynamic coupling of the dendrites to the soma.Persistent activation of I Nap may also contribute to another electrophysiological feature of neurons: the generation of plateau potentials. A plateau potential refers to the ability of many different types of neurons to generate, through intrinsic ionic mechanisms, a prolonged depolarization and action potential discharge in response to a short-lasting depolarization Potassium currents that contribute to the electrophysiological properties of neurons are numerous and exhibit a wide range of voltage-dependent and kinetic properties Another broad class of K  channels consists of those that are sensitive to changes in the intracellular concentration of Ca 2 . These K  currents collectively are referred to as I KCa Molecular biological studies of voltage-sensitive K  channels, fi rst done in Drosophila and later in mammals, have revealed the presence of a large number of genes that generate K  channels. The voltage-gated K  channel subunits are contained within nine distinct subfamilies: Kv1-9 One of the largest subfamilies of K  channels are those that give rise to the resting membrane potential, socalled "leak channels." Interestingly, these channels appear to be opened by gaseous anesthetics, indicating that hyperpolarization of central neurons is a major component of general anesthesia. It is now clear that each type of neuron in the nervous system contains a unique set of functional voltage-sensitive K  channels, selected, modifi ed, and placed in particular spatial locations in the cell in a manner that facilitates the unique role of that cell type in neuronal processing.An additional current that also regulates the responsiveness of neurons to depolarizing inputs is the voltage-sensitive K  current known as the M current Ionic channels that conduct Ca 2 are present in all neurons. These channels are special in that they serve two important functions. First, Ca 2 channels are present throughout the different parts of the neuron and contribute greatly to the electrophysiological properties of these processes. Second, Ca 2 channels are unique in that Ca 2 is an important second messenger in neurons, and entry of Ca 2 into the cell can affect numerous physiological functions, including neurotransmitter release, synaptic plasticity, neurite outgrowth during development, and even gene expression. On the bases of their voltage sensitivity, their kinetics of activation and inactivation, and their ability to be blocked by various pharmacological agents, Ca 2 currents can be separated into at least six separate categories, three of which are I T, I L, and I N, illustrated in High voltage-activated Ca 2 channels are activated at membrane potentials positive to approximately 40 mV and include the currents I L , I N , and I P . L-type calcium currents exhibit a high threshold for activation and give rise to rather persistent, or long-lasting, ionic currents Collectively, high threshold-activated Ca 2 channels contribute to the generation of action potentials in mammalian neurons. The activation of Ca 2 currents adds somewhat to the depolarizing part of the action potential, but, more importantly, these channels allow Ca 2 to enter the cell, which has the secondary consequence of activation of various Ca 2 -activated K  currents and protein kinases. As mentioned earlier, activation of these K  currents modifi es the pattern of action potentials generated in the cell High-threshold Ca 2 channels are similar to the Na  channel in that they are composed of a central a1 subunit that forms the aqueous pore and several regulatory or auxiliary subunits. As in the Na  channel, the primary structure of the a1 subunit of the Ca 2 channel consists of four homologous domains, each containing six regions that may generate transmembrane a-helices. Genes for at least 10 different Ca 2 channel a subunits have been cloned and are separated into three subfamilies. The properties of the products of these genes indicate that I L is likely to correspond to the Cav1 subfamily, whereas I N corresponds to Cav2.2 and I T is formed from the Cav3 subfamily Low-threshold Ca 2 currents In the mammalian brain, this pattern is especially well exemplifi ed by the activity of thalamic relay neurons in the visual system, these neurons receive direct input from the retina and transmit this information to the visual cortex. During periods of slow wave sleep, the membrane potential of these relay neurons is relatively hyperpolarized, resulting in the removal of inactivation of the low-threshold Ca 2 current. This deinactivation allows these cells to spontaneously generate low-threshold Ca 2 spikes and bursts of from two to fi ve action potentials The transition to waking or the period of sleep when dreams are prevalent is associated with a maintained depolarization of thalamic relay cells to membrane potentials ranging from about 60 to 55 mV. The low-threshold Ca 2 current is inactivated and therefore the burst discharges are abolished. In this way, the properties of a single ionic current help explain in part the remarkable changes Oscillatory mode Oscillatory mode Tonic mode FIGURE 6.13 Two different patterns of activity generated in the same neuron, depending on membrane potential. The thalamic neuron spontaneously generates rhythmic bursts of action potentials due to the interaction of the Ca 2 current I T and the inward "pacemaker" current I h . Depolarization of the neuron changes the fi ring mode from rhythmic burst fi ring to tonic action potential generation in which spikes are generated one at a time. Removal of this depolarization reinstates rhythmic burst fi ring. This transition from rhythmic burst fi ring to tonic activity is similar to that which occurs in the transition from sleep to waking. Expansion of detail of rhythmic burst fi ring. Expansion of detail of tonic fi ring. From A century ago the as yet unnamed fi eld of neuroscience was having growth pains. It was a time marked by claim and counterclaim, confusion, and recrimination-not unlike politics today, or for that matter, science. One major reason for the tumult was the heretical idea that the brain is not one continuous network, with each cell in physical contact with its neighbors. The pioneering studies of Santiago Ramon y Cajal revealed a very different picture from the dogma, with each cell of the brain being an independent structure Neurons vary widely in function but share certain structural characteristics. They have a cell body from which processes emerge. Axons can be short or long and can be local or project to distant areas. In contrast, dendrites are exclusively local structures. The identifi cation of long and short processes led to the idea that the long axonal projections served to transmit information between neurons, often over long distances, and dendrites were the receptive elements of neurons, responding to the long information sent via axons. The gap over which information between neurons must be conveyed was termed the synapse by Charles Sherrington Over the fi rst half of the twentieth century there was a vigorous debate on the nature of neuronal communication: as one review of this debate described, it was a war of sparks and soups These and other data suggested that the major means of interneuronal communication is chemical in nature, but that neurons also use other processes for intercellular communication. Among these are electrical synaptic transmission, ephaptic interactions, and autocrine, paracrine, and long-range signaling, to which molecules produced by both neural and nonneural cells contribute. The nonsynaptic mode of intercellular communication with the longest range is hormonal signaling. For example, some hormones made outside of the brain can enter the central nervous system to exert effects on neurons that express receptors for the hormones. These hormone actions may occur over the short term or, more often, over a longer period.Molecules released from neurons can also be used in intercellular signaling that does not require synaptic specializations. There are a host of molecules that are secreted by neurons or diffuse passively from cells, ranging from conventional neurotransmitters to gases such as nitric oxide. These factors may act through autocrine mechanisms or paracrine pathways to infl uence nearby cells. Some of these compounds can be retrograde signaling molecules, providing chemically-coded information to the presynaptic neuron, thus reversing the more common forward direction of information fl ow. The role of such molecules is thought to be primarily in modulating neural activity, although they may also provide guidance cues for neurons that are growing toward their fi nal targets in the brain as well as for the establishment and maintenance of synaptic connections.Chemically-mediated transmission is the major mode of neuronal communication. The general acceptance of chemical neurotransmission as the means of conveying information between neurons resulted in the establishment of specifi c criteria for designation of a compound as a neurotransmitter. A relatively small number of compounds have been designated as neurotransmitters based on these "classical" criteria. However, over the past generation it has become apparent that there is a large number of chemical messengers that broadly qualify as intercellular transmitters, although these compounds often do not meet-and even stand in sharp contrast to-the classical criteria.Neurotransmitters usually are considered to be endogenous substances that are released from neurons, act on receptor sites that are typically present on membranes of postsynaptic cells, and produce a functional change in the properties of the target cell. Over the years general agreement evolved that several criteria should be met for a substance to be designated a neurotransmitter:1. A neurotransmitter must be synthesized by and released from neurons. This means that the presynaptic neuron should contain a transmitter and the appropriate enzymes need to synthesize that neurotransmitter. Synthesis in the axon terminal is not an absolute requirement. For example, peptide transmitters are synthesized in the cell body and transported to distant sites, where they are released. 2. The substance should be released from nerve terminals in a chemically-or pharmacologicallyidentifi able form. Thus, one should be able to isolate the transmitter and characterize its structure using biochemical or other techniques. 3. A neurotransmitter should reproduce at the postsynaptic cell the specifi c events that are seen after stimulation of the presynaptic neuron. 4. The effects of a putative neurotransmitter should be blocked by competitive antagonists of the receptor for the transmitter in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, treatments that inhibit synthesis of the transmitter candidate should block the effects of presynaptic stimulation. 5. There should be active mechanisms to terminate the action of the putative neurotransmitter. Among such mechanisms are uptake of the transmitter by the presynaptic neuron or glial cells through specifi c transporter molecules, or alternatively enzymatic inactivation of the chemical messenger.Synaptic transmission consists of a number of steps. The general mechanisms of chemical synaptic transmission are depicted in neuron. In order for the transmitter to be synthesized, precursors should be present in appropriate places within neurons. Enzymes taking part in the conversion of the precursor into the transmitter should be present in an active form and localized to the appropriate compartment in the neuron. For example, one would not expect synthetic enzymes for the transmitter to be found in the nucleus or the mitochondrion. In addition, any cofactors that are required for enzyme activity should be present. Drugs affecting the synthesis of neurotransmitters have long been of value in medicine. An example is a-methyl-p-tyrosine, a drug used to treat an adrenal gland tumor that causes very high blood pressure by releasing massive amounts of norepinephrine. a-Methyl-p-tyrosine prevents the synthesis of NE, thereby lowering blood pressure.2. Storage of the neurotransmitter andor its precursor in the presynaptic nerve terminal. Classical and peptide transmitters are stored in synaptic vesicles, where they are sequestered and protected from enzymatic degradation and are ready for quick release. In the case of classical neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, the synaptic vesicles are small, in contrast to the large dense-core vesicles in which neuropeptide transmitters are stored. Vesicles are often found adjacent to the presynaptic membrane, where they are poised to be released in response to stimulation of the neuron. Because most neurotransmitters are synthesized in the cytosol of neurons, there must be some mechanism through which the the neuron, the amino acid precursor is metabolized sequentially to yield the mature transmitter. The transmitter is then accumulated into vesicles by the vesicular transporter, where it is poised for release and protected from degradation. Once released, the transmitter can interact with postsynaptic receptors or autoreceptors that regulate transmitter release, synthesis, or fi ring rate. Transmitter actions are terminated by means of a high-affi nity membrane transporter that usually is associated with the neuron that released the transmitter. Alternatively, transmitter actions may be terminated by diffusion from the active sites or accumulation into glia through a membrane transporter. When the transmitter is taken up by the neuron, it is subject to metabolic inactivation.The term classical is used to differentiate acetylcholine, the biogenic amines, and the amino acid transmitters from other transmitters. The designation is somewhat arbitrary, although these compounds were all accepted as neurotransmitters by the late 1950s. Several criteria can be used to distinguish classical from other transmitters, such as the peptide transmitters. First, storage vesicles for classical transmitters are smaller. Second, classical transmitters are subject to active reuptake by the presynaptic cell and thus can be viewed as homeostatically conserved in contrast, there is no energy-dependent, high-affi nity reuptake process for nonclassical transmitters. Third, most classical transmitters are synthesized in the nerve terminal by enzymatic action, and peptides are synthesized in the soma from a precursor protein and are then transported to the nerve terminal. The remainder of this chapter deals with the biochemistry of several different transmitter groups, discussing their synthesis, storage, and release. Other aspects of chemical transmission, including detailed discussions of transmitter release and the receptors for various transmitters is presented in Chapters 8 and 9.Catecholamines are organic compounds that contain a catechol nucleus and an amine group. In general practice the term normally is used to describe the three transmitters: dopamine, NE, and epinephrine. These three neurotransmitters are formed by successive enzymatic steps requiring distinct enzymes Catecholamines also have transmitter roles in the peripheral nervous system and certain hormonal functions. In the peripheral nervous system, DA has signifi cant biological activity in the kidney but is mainly present as a NE precursor. NE is the transmitter of the sympathetic nervous system in mammals, whereas Epi is the sympathetic transmitter in frogs. Despite this species difference, biochemical aspects of neurotransmission are remarkably constant across different vertebrate species and even invertebrates.The amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine are precursors for catecholamines. Both amino acids are found in high concentrations in the plasma and brain. In mammals, tyrosine can be formed from dietary phenylalanine by the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase, found in large amounts in the liver. Insuffi cient amounts of phenylalanine hydroxylase result in phenylketonuria, a metabolic disorder that leads to intellectual defi cits unless treated by dietary manipulation.Catecholamine synthesis usually is considered to begin with tyrosine. The enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase converts the amino acid l-tyrosine into 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine. The hydroxylation of l-tyrosine by TH results in the formation of the DA precursor l-DOPA, which is metabolized by l-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase In human beings, a single TH gene is alternatively spliced to yield four TH mRNAs and four distinct TH protein isoforms. However, in most primates, only two TH isoforms are present, and the rat possesses but a single form of TH. It has been speculated that different TH forms in primates are associated with differences in activity of the enzyme, but conclusive data addressing this point are lacking.The function of TH and other enzymes is determined by two factors: changes in enzyme activity and changes in the amount of enzyme protein.The major determinant of TH activity is phosphorylation of the enzyme. Another means of regulating enzyme activity is through end product inhibition: catecholamines can inhibit the activity of TH by competing for a required cofactor for the enzyme Increased neuronal demand for catecholamines to be released can be accomplished by synthesizing new TH protein or increasing the activity of the TH activity. The degree to which increases in catecholamine synthesis depend on de novo synthesis of new enzyme protein or changes in the activity of existing enzymes differs across brain regions. For example, in most NE neurons, increases in TH gene expression and synthesis of the enzyme are readily seen when conditions require more catecholamine synthesis, but in midbrain DA neurons phosphorylation of TH is much more important.The synthesis of catecholamines starts with the entry of tyrosine into the brain. This process is an energy-dependent one in which tyrosine competes with large neutral amino acids as a substrate for a transporter. Because brain tyrosine levels are high enough to saturate TH, catecholamine synthesis cannot usually be increased by administration of tyrosine. Exceptions to this rule are catecholamine synthesis in cells that are very active, such as DA neurons that project to the prefrontal cortex, and under certain pathological conditions. Because TH is saturated by tyrosine, tyrosine hydroxylation is the rate-limiting step in catecholamine synthesis under basal conditions. However, when NE-or Epi-containing cells are activated, dopamine-b-hydroxylase becomes ratelimiting, and thus tyrosine availability can regulate catecholamine synthesis under certain conditions. TH is a mixed function oxidase with moderate substrate specifi city, hydroxylating phenylalanine as well as tyrosine. The actions of TH require the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin and iron BH4 is also an essential cofactor for tryptophan hydroxylase, the enzyme that synthesizes another transmitter, serotonin. Because BH4 is not present in saturating concentrations under basal conditions, it is crucial in regulating TH activity. Intracellular levels of BH4 are determined by its own synthesizing enzyme, GTP cyclohydrolase. Mutations in the gene encoding GTP cyclohydrolase result in DOPA-responsive dystonia, a movement disorder that is treated by administering l-DOPA to increase central DA levels.The hydroxylation of tyrosine by TH generates l-DOPA, which is then decarboxylated to dopamine by l-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase. AADC has low substrate specifi city and decarboxylates tryptophan as well as tyrosine. Because AADC is found in both catecholamine and serotonin neurons, it plays an important role in the synthesis of both transmitters. In dopaminergic neurons, AADC is the fi nal enzyme of the synthetic pathway. DA does not cross the blood-brain barrier, but its precursor l-DOPA enters the brain readily. l-DOPA has achieved fame as a means of treating Parkinsons disease, which is due to loss of DA in the striatum. Although DOPA freely enters the brain, it is readily metabolized in the liver and bloodstream. It is therefore necessary to administer l-DOPA together with an inhibitor of decarboxylases that does not enter the brain but blocks metabolism in the liver and blood.Noradrenergic and adrenergic neurons contain the enzyme dopamine-b-hydroxylase, which converts DA into NE. In noradrenergic neurons, this is the fi nal step in catecholamine synthesis. Humans have two different DBH mRNAs that are generated from a single gene. DBH lacks a high degree of substrate specifi city and in vitro it oxidizes almost any phenylethylamine to its corresponding phenylethanolamine. For example, in addition to forming NE from DA, DBH converts tyramine into octopamine. Interestingly, receptors that have a high affi nity for the trace amines tyramine and octopamine recently have been discovered Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase is present at high levels in a restricted number of brainstem neurons that use epinephrine as a transmitter, and in the inner portion of the adrenal gland, where it methylates NE to form Epi, the major adrenal catecholamine. There is a single PNMT gene. The regulation of PNMT activity in the brain has not been as extensively studied as in the adrenal gland, where glucocorticoids and nerve growth factor regulate the enzyme.Catecholamines are stored in specialized subcellular organelles called vesicles. Accordingly, a specialized vesicular transporter protein is required in order for dopamine that is formed in the cytosol to enter the vesicle.The vesicle serves as a depot for the transmitter until it is released by appropriate physiological stimuli. In addition, vesicles isolate transmitters and protect them from metabolic inactivation by intraneuronal enzymes found in the cytosol, and from attack by toxins that have gained entry to the cell vesicle.The NE-synthesizing enzyme DBH differs from the other enzymes in catecholamine synthesis by being localized to the vesicle rather than the cytosol. This means that only after DA is taken up by vesicles through the vesicular monoamine transporter is it metabolized to NE. This vesicular storage of DBH has an interesting consequence: DBH and dopamine can both be released into the synapse along with NE. FIGURE 7.2 Characteristics of a norepinephrine-containing catecholamine neuron. Tyrosine is accumulated by the neuron and then is metabolized sequentially by tyrosine hydroxylase and l-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase to dopamine. The DA is then taken up through the vesicular monoamine transporter into vesicles. In DA neurons, this is the fi nal step. However, in this NE-containing cell, DA is metabolized to NE by dopamine--hydroxylase, which is found in the vesicle. Once NE is released, it can interact with postsynaptic noradrenergic receptors or presynaptic noradrenergic autoreceptors. The accumulation of NE by the high-affi nity membrane NE transporter terminates the actions of NE. Once taken back up by the neuron, NE can be metabolized to inactive compounds by degradative enzymes such as monoamine oxidase or taken back up by the vesicle.The ability of vesicles to accumulate DA and other compounds depends on VMAT The VMATs are inhibited by reserpine. This drug has been used for centuries in India as a folk medicine to treat high blood pressure and psychoses. These uses of reserpine were reported in international journals in the early 1930s, but these therapeutic actions were not appreciated in Western medicine until a generation later the unpleasant side effects of reserpine initially garnered more attention. In the 1950s Bernard Brodie and coworkers discovered that reserpine depleted brain serotonin. The contemporaneous discovery that the hallucinogen LSD is structurally similar to serotonin led to the proposal that the antipsychotic actions of reserpine were due to its ability to deplete serotonin in the brain. However, it was soon realized that reserpine depletes both serotonin and catecholamines in the brain thus, antipsychotic effects of reserpine might be due to serotonin or catecholamine depletion, or both.To determine if serotonin or catecholamines were more important for the antipsychotic effect of reserpine, Arvid more important, Arvid Carlsson and colleagues administered catecholamine and serotonin precursors to rats treated with reserpine in an attempt to replenish the levels of the transmitters. They then examined locomotor activity, which is severely depressed by reserpine. Motor function was restored by the DA precursor l-DOPA but not by the serotonin precursor 5-hydroxytryptophan. This work led to the characterization of DA as a neurotransmitter. The demonstration that l-DOPA increases brain DA concentrations in reserpinized animals suggested that the primary mechanism through which reserpine exerts antipsychotic effects was through its ability to disrupt DA transmission. This idea led directly to the hypothesis that the dysfunction of central DA systems underlies schizophrenia. Interestingly, studies have suggested that drugs that are antagonists at both certain DA and serotonin receptors may be better than DA antagonists in treating schizophrenia.VMATs have signifi cant homology with a group of bacterial antibiotic drug resistance transporters, suggesting a role of VMAT in detoxifi cation. This is indeed the case: VMAT sequesters the transmitter in vesicles where it is protected from various toxins. This is perhaps best illustrated by studies of heterozygous mice with one copy of VMAT2. In these mice, the parkinsonian toxin MPTP causes a greater loss of DA neurons than in wildtype control mice because there is less VMAT to package the toxin into vesicles and thus permits the toxin to disrupt mitochondrial function.Catecholamine release usually operates through the same calcium-dependent exocytotic process used by other transmitters, but can also occur through at least two other mechanisms. First, catecholamines can be released by a reversal of the direction of transport through the membrane transporters DAT and NET. For example, this occurs in response to certain drugs. Second, DA and perhaps other catecholamines can be released from dendrites through a process that does not appear to involve Ca 2 .Enzymes that control catecholamine synthesis can be regulated at both the transcriptional level and by posttranslational modifi cations that alter enzymatic activity. In addition, DA and NE can be regulated by the interaction of released catecholamine with specifi c DA or NE "autoreceptors" located on the nerve terminal.Autoreceptors are found on most parts of the neuron and are defi ned functionally by the events that they regulate. Thus, synthesis-, release-, and impulse-modulating DA autoreceptors have been described Constant levels of a neurotransmitter in the synapse will not accurately convey information about the dynamic state of the presynaptic neuron to its follower cell. In addition, continuous stimulation of certain receptors is pathological and can damage postsynaptic cells. For example, when certain receptors for the transmitter glutamate are activated continuous, the result is "excitotoxic" cell death.In order to prevent continuous presynaptic signaling, different mechanisms for terminating the actions of a transmitter have evolved. The simplest is diffusion of the transmitter and its subsequent dilution in extracellular fl uid to subthreshold concentrations. Believed to be more important are active modes of halting transmitter action, including enzymatic inactivation of the transmitter and uptake of the transmitter by membrane-associated transporter proteins.Enzymatic inactivation originally was thought to be the major means of terminating catecholamine actions in the CNS, although it now appears that reuptake of the transmitter is the primary mode of inactivation. Two enzymes contribute to catecholamine catabolism: monoamine oxidase and catechol-0-methyltransferase. These enzymes can act independently or can act on the products generated by the other enzyme, leading to catecholamine metabolites that are deaminated, O-methylated, or both. COMT is a relatively nonspecifi c enzyme that transfers methyl groups from the donor S-adenosylmethionine to the m-hydroxy group of catechols. COMT is found in both peripheral tissues and central nervous system and is the major means of inactivating catecholamines that are released from the adrenal gland.MAOs oxidatively deaminates catecholamines and their O-methylated derivatives to form inactive and unstable derivatives that can be further degraded by other enzymes. Two forms of MAO have been identifi ed. MAO A has high affi nities for NE and serotonin and is selectively inhibited by drugs such as clorgyline. In contrast, MAO B has a higher affi nity for o-phenylethylamines and is selectively inhibited by different compounds, such as deprenyl. The MAOs are important targets of drugs used to treat several neuropsychiatric disorders.The reuptake of a transmitter released by a neuron is the major mode of transmitter inactivation in the brain. Accumulation of the transmitter also allows intracellular enzymes that degrade the transmitter to act, thus bolstering the actions of extracellular enzymes.Several characteristics defi ne the high-affi nity neuronal reuptake of transmitters Membrane catecholamine transporters are not Mg 2 dependent and are not inhibited by reserpine, which distinguishes neuronal and vesicular membrane transporters. Catecholamine transporters are localized to neurons: although there appears to be a reuptake process that accumulates catecholamines into glia, this is not a high affi nity process and its functional significance is unclear.Two distinct mammalian catecholamine transporters, one for dopamine and one for norepinephrine, have been identifi ed. The two are closely related members of a class of transporter proteins with 12 transmembrane domains. Neither transporter is specifi c, with each accumulating both DA and NE. In fact, NET has a higher affi nity for dopamine than for NE. An epinephrine transporter has been identifi ed in the frog but not in mammals.The regional distribution of DAT and NET largely follows the expected localization to DA and NE neurons, respectively. However, DAT does not appear to be expressed in all DA cells. Certain hypothalamic cells that release DA into the blood system of the pituitary lack detectable DAT mRNA and protein. Because One hypothesis of the pathophysiology of depression posits a decrease in noradrenergic levels in the brain. MAO A inhibitors, such as tranylcypromine, effectively increase NE levels and were once a mainstay in the treatment of depression. However, the use of MAO inhibitors in depression largely has been supplanted by the introduction of drugs that increase extracellular NE levels by blocking the NE transporter and other agents that increase 5-HT or DA levels by blocking SERT or DAT. The treatment of depression with MAO A inhibitors, although still useful for certain patients who do not respond to other antidepressants, is marred by a large number of side effects. Among the most serious is hypertensive crisis. Patients treated with MAO A inhibitors cannot metabolize tyramine effi ciently, which is present in large amounts in certain foods, such as aged cheeses and red wines. Because tyramine releases catecholamines peripherally, small amounts of tyramine increase blood pressure signifi cantly and may lead to a high risk for stroke.Deprenyl, a specifi c inhibitor of MAO B , has been used as an initial treatment for Parkinsons disease. The use of deprenyl in the treatment of PD and the rationale for its use were based on data from studies of a neurotoxin, 1-methyl-4-pheny 1-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine. MPTP results in the degeneration of midbrain DA neurons and a parkinsonian syndrome. MPTP-induced parkinsonism was fi rst noted in a group of opiate addicts. In an attempt to synthesize a designer drug, the structurally related MPTP was inadvertently produced addicts who injected this drug developed a severe parkinsonian syndrome. Subsequent animal studies showed that MPTP itself is not toxic, but that its active metabolite, MPP  , is highly toxic. The formation of MPP  from MPTP is catalyzed by MAO B , and treatment with MAO inhibitors such as deprenyl can prevent MPTP toxicity. The realization that MPTP administration rather faithfully reproduces the cardinal signs and symptoms of PD reawakened interest in environmental toxins as a cause of PD. The MPTP saga also led to the idea that deprenyl treatment might slow the progression of PD by preventing metabolism of an environmental compound to an active toxin such as MPP  . Although clinical studies initially were interpreted to suggest that there was a slowing of clinical progression of Parkinsons disease in response to deprenyl, later studies showed that deprenyl increases DA levels slightly and thus gives some symptomatic relief.Catechol O-methyl transferase, which together with MAO degrades catecholamines, also plays a role in the treatment of PD. Two COMT inhibitors are used to prevent the enzymatic inactivation of DOPA. By inhibiting COMT, these drugs prolong the therapeutic action of DOPA and may smooth out fl uctuations in the therapeutic response to DOPA.Changes in catecholamine function also have been the object of intense scrutiny in schizophrenia, with recent attention focusing on possible changes in dopamine. One allelic variant of the COMT gene results in a much reduced activity of the enzyme. Data have examined COMT alleles for full vs. low COMT activity in normal subjects and schizophrenics. Individuals bearing the allele that confers lower COMT activity display improved performance on cognitive tasks that involve DA actions in the prefrontal cortex the performance of schizophrenic persons on these tasks is impaired. It therefore has been proposed that high COMT activity may confer an increased risk to schizophrenia.DA released from these neurons is carried away in the blood, the existence of a transporter protein on these DA cells would be superfl uous.Immunohistochemical studies of the subcellular localization of DAT led to an unexpected fi nding. DAT is not found at the synaptic junction, but just outside of this region. Thus, the transporter may be used to accumulate and therefore inactivate DA that has escaped from the synaptic cleft. This suggests that diffusion is the initial process by which DA is removed from the synapse. The extrasynaptic localization of the catecholamine transporters, coupled with a similar extrasynaptic localization of dopamine receptors, suggests that extrasynaptic neurotransmission may be of major importance in catecholamine signaling.Mice in which the gene encoding DAT has been deleted have been particularly useful in clarifying the function of transporters. Transgenic mice that lack DAT have a remarkable number of changes in DA function, ranging from increased extracellular DA levels and delayed clearance of released DA to a striking decrease in tissue concentrations of DA in the face of increased DA synthesis The catechoamine transporters are important targets of many drugs. Cocaine and amphetamine both increase extracellular levels of catecholamines by blocking transporters. In particular, cocaine shows a very high affi nity for DAT amphetamine is a less potent inhibitor but also induces "release" of catecholamines. Drugs used in the treatment of attention defi cit disorder, including amphetamine, methylphenidate, and atomoxetine also act by blocking catecholamine transporters. NET is the molecular target of tricyclic antidepressant drugs, which potently inhibit NE reuptake.Well over a century ago scientists were aware of a substance in the blood that induced powerful contractions of smooth muscle organs. In the mid-twentieth century, Page and collaborators succeeded in isolating the compound, which they suggested to be a possible cause of high blood pressure, from platelets. At the same time, Italian researchers were studying a substance in intestinal mucosa that caused contractions of intestinal smooth muscle. The material isolated from platelets was called "serotonin," and the substance isolated from the intestinal tract was named "enteramine." Studies soon revealed that the two substances were the same compound, 5-hydroxytryptamine, which now is commonly referred to as serotonin.Serotonin is found in neurons and in several other types of cells in the body. In fact, the brain accounts for only about 1% of total body stores of serotonin. Although the isolation and identifi cation of serotonin were from peripheral tissues, much of the subsequent interest in serotonin was based on its potential involvement in psychiatric disorders. The fi nding that serotonins chemical structure is similar to that of LSD led to theories that associated abnormalities in serotonin function to schizophrenia and depression.The basic process of serotonin biosynthesis is very similar to that of catecholamine transmitters: a peripheral amino acid gains entry into the brain and is metabolized in serotonergic neurons via a series of enzymatic steps. Once tryptophan enters the serotonergic neuron, it is hydroxylated by tryptophan hydroxylase, the rate-limiting step in serotonin synthesis, giving rise to 5-hydroxytryptophan, which is then decarboxylated by l-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase to the transmitter serotonin. Thus, only two critical enzymes are involved in the synthesis of 5-HT Although serotonin is usually the endpoint of tryptophan metabolism in brain, serotonin can be metabolized further to yield active products. In the pineal gland, 5-HT is metabolized to form 5-methoxy-Nacetyltryptamine, a hormone thought to play an important role in sleep. In peripheral tissues, most tryptophan is not metabolized to 5-HT but instead is metabolized by the kynurenine pathway. This kynurenine shunt is also present in the brain and leads to the accumulation of several interesting active substances Serotonin is inactivated primarily by reuptake through SERT, the serotonin transporter that belongs to the same family of transporters as the catecholamine transporters. The most commonly used antidepressants today are a class of compounds known as serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs the prototypic SSRI is fl uoxetine. Because antidepressant drugs increase serotonin or norepinephrine levels, or both, current theories of depression posit critical modulatory roles for NE and 5-HT.The enzymatic degradation of 5-HT is catalyzed by monoamine oxidase. The product of this reaction, 5-hydroxyindole acid aldehyde, is oxidized further to 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. MAO inhibitors increase 5-HT levels and have been widely used as antidepressants.Our basic ideas about chemical synaptic transmission are based on early studies of acetylcholine. Both pharmacological and electrophysiological studies at the neuromuscular junction led to key fi ndings on ACh that remain the cornerstone for todays understanding of chemical neurotransmission. For example, electrophysiological studies revealed fast excitatory responses of muscle fi bers to the stimulation of nerves innervating the muscle. The presence of miniature end plate potentials in muscle fi ber was noted, and in the early 1950s, Fatt and Katz demonstrated that these mEPPs resulted from the slow "leakage" of ACh, with each mEPP representing the release of transmitter in one vesicle. Overt depolarization generated an increase in the number of quanta released over a given period of time.Over the past half century many of the rules that govern ACh neurotransmission have been found to be general principles that apply to many transmitters.In large part the general principles that govern catecholamine and serotonin synthesis also apply to acetylcholine synthesis. The synthesis of ACh is simple, with only a single step: the acetyl group from acetylcoenzyme A is transferred to choline by the enzyme choline acetyltransferase. There are correspondingly few requirements for ACh synthesis: the presence of the substrate choline, the donor acetylcoenzyme A, and ChAT. The acetyl-CoA that serves as the donor is derived from pyruvate generated by glucose metabolism. There is one interesting twist on ACh synthesis: acetyl-CoA is localized to mitochondria, but the synthetic enzyme ChAT is cytoplasmic, dictating that acetyl-CoA must exit the mitochondria to gain access to ChAT. Despite the fact that ChAT is the only enzyme involved in ACh synthesis, it is not the rate-limiting step in synthesis of the transmitter. The full enzymatic activity of ChAT is not expressed in vivo: ChAT activity measured in vitro is much greater than would be expected on the basis of ACh synthesis in vivo. The reason for this discrepancy has been suggested to be related to the requirement that acetyl-CoA be transported from the mitochondria to the cytoplasm. Alternatively, intracellular choline concentrations may determine the rate of ACh synthesis. This latter idea has led to the use of choline precursors in attempts to enhance ACh synthesis in Alzheimer disease, in which there is a marked decrease of cortical ACh levels. Unfortunately, these attempts have not proven very successful.ACh is taken up into storage vesicles by the vesicular cholinergic transporter. Cloning of human VAChT revealed that the gene is localized to chromosome 10, near the ChAT gene for ChAT. Additional studies then demonstrated that the entire VAChT coding region is contained in the fi rst intron of the ChAT gene. This suggested that both genes are coordinately regulated, a suspicion that subsequently was confi rmed.The primary mode of inactivation of ACh appears to be enzymatic, which is simply the hydrolysis of ACh to choline. Two groups of cholinesterases have been defi ned on the basis of substrate specifi city: acetylcholinesterases and butyrylcholinesterases AChE is found in high concentrations in cholinergic neurons. However, AChE also is found in moderately high concentrations in some noncholinergic neurons that receive cholinergic inputs. This observation is consistent with the fact that AChE is a secreted enzyme that is associated with the cell membrane. Thus, ACh hydrolysis takes place extracellularly, and the choline generated is conserved by the high-affi nity reuptake process. In addition to its role in inactivating acetylcholine, AChE has been proposed to be a chemical messenger in the CNS.Several amino acids fulfi ll most of the criteria for consideration as neurotransmitters. The best studied of these are g-aminobutyric acid, the major inhibitory transmitter in brain, and glutamate, which is the major excitatory transmitter in brain. Many of the principles concerning transmitter synthesis and inactivation that were previously discussed apply to amino acid transmitters, however there are some key differences between the amino acid and other classical transmitters. The most obvious difference is that GABA is derived from glucose metabolism The GABA Shunt and GABA Transaminase GABA ultimately is derived from glucose metabolism. a-Ketoglutarate formed by the Krebs cycle is the transmitter and metabolic pools of glutamate, as well as different vesicular transporters that accumulate glutamate and GABA into vesicles. A neuronal enzyme that is localized to vesicles has been proposed to be responsible for the synthesis of the transmitter pool of glutamate.A vesicular GABA transporter has been cloned on the basis of homology to a protein in the worm Caenorhabditis elegans. The strategy of moving from invertebrate to mammalian species has been very useful in identifying a variety of mammalian transmitter-related genes. The vesicular GABA transporter shares with the vesicular monoamine transporters a lack of substrate specifi city, and will transport the inhibitory transmitter glycine as well as GABA. Some rare GABA cells may lack the transporter, raising the specter of a related transporter or some unique functional attribute of these cells.As is the case with other classical transmitters, GABAergic cells have autoreceptors that regulate release of the transmitter. There are two major classes of GABA receptors. One type of GABA receptor forms ion channels, which are found mainly on cells postsynaptic to GABA terminals the second class are G protein-coupled receptors. Pharmacological studies indicate that the autoreceptor-mediated regulation of GABA neurons takes place mainly through G proteincoupled GABA B receptors located on GABAergic axon terminals. Anatomical studies have revealed that GABA B receptors sometimes also are found on postsynaptic non-GABAergic neurons. It is possible that these postsynaptic GABA B sites respond to GABA released from a neuron that is presynaptic to another GABA neuron. Interestingly, when one GABA neuron terminates on another GABA cell, the inhibition of the second will have the same functional consequence as an autoreceptor on the third cell in the chain.Reuptake is the primary mode of inactivation of the transmitter GABA. There are four GABA transporters, providing a diverse means of regulating GABA neurons. Early studies defi ned the different GABA transporters as neuronal or glial based on pharmacological criteria. However, anatomical studies found that one GAT that had been defi ned on pharmacological grounds as a glial transporter is present in both neurons and glia. The reason for multiple GABA transporters is not clear. GATs are expressed in both GABAergic and non-GABAergic cells. Consistent with the promiscuous uptake of transmitters by other transporters, GATs also appear to take up amino acids other than GABA.Excitatory amino acid transmitters account for most of the fast synaptic transmission that occurs in the mammalian brain. Glutamate and aspartate are the major excitatory amino acid neurotransmitters, and several related amino acids, such as N-acetylaspartylglutamate, are also thought to have neurotransmitter roles. Excitatory amino acids such as glutamate participate in both intermediary metabolism and neuronal communication.Neither glutamate nor aspartate crosses the bloodbrain barrier, and in the brain these transmitters are derived only by local synthesis from glucose. Two processes lead to glutamate synthesis in the nerve terminal. As discussed earlier, glutamate is formed from glucose through the Krebs cycle and transamination of a-ketoglutarate. In addition, glutamate can be formed directly from glutamine. Because glutamine is synthesized in glial cells, both neurons and glia are important in determining the transmitter pool of glutamate. Glutamine is exported from glia and is transported into nerve terminals before being converted into glutamate by a glutaminase enzyme Because of the intermingling of glial and neuronal contributions to glutamate synthesis, and the lack of specifi c enzymes or other proteins to distinguish the metabolic pool of glutamate from the transmitter glutamate, it was diffi cult to clearly identify a neuron as using glutamate as a transmitter. The identifi cation of three vesicular glutamate transporters, VGluT1, 2, and 3, has resulted in a simple means of marking glutamatergic neurons. However, anatomical studies over the past several years have revealed that many glutamate neurons also contain one or more other transmitters Just as there are several vesicular glutamate receptors, there are several glutamate transporters that terminate the action of glutamate. An unusual aspect is that one of these transporters is expressed by astrocytes and is the major accumulator of glutamate from the extracellular space. Moreover, relatively new data point to glia as releasing glutamate in a signaling capacity. These fi ndings have led to an increasing awareness of glia as being far more than structural support cells and argue for a much broader contribution of glia to neuronal communication We have discussed classical transmitters, of which there are relatively few. Many more transmitters are peptides. There are some clear differences between peptide and classical transmitters, but the two groups have more in common. For example, both classical and peptide transmitters usually are very well conserved across species many of the peptide transmitters initially were isolated from amphibians. In addition, both classical and peptide transmitters are synthesized in neurons, where they are stored in vesicles and released in a Ca 2 -dependent manner. However, the biosynthetic mechanisms and the modes of inactivation of peptide and classical transmitters differ. We will fi rst consider the question of the signifi cance of multiple neurotransmitters, and then turn to the general principles of peptide transmitter biosynthesis and inactivation.About a dozen classical transmitters and dozens of neuropeptides function as transmitters. There are still more "unconventional" transmitters, which we will address later in this chapter. If transmitters simply serve as a chemical bridge that conveys information between two spatially distinct cells, why have so many chemical messengersPerhaps the simplest explanation for multiple transmitters is that many nerve terminals synapse onto a single neuron. How can a neuron distinguish between multiple inputs that carry different information One way is to segregate the place on the neuron at which an input arrives, such as the soma, axon, or dendrite. However, because many afferents terminate in close proximity, another means of distinguishing inputs and their information is necessary: chemical coding of the inputs by neurotransmitters.The idea that a neuron is limited to one transmitter can be traced to Henry Dale, or more accurately, to an informal restatement of what is termed Dales principle. In the 1940s, Dale posited that a metabolic process that takes place in the cell body can reach or infl uence events in all processes of the neuron. Sir John Eccles restated Dales view to suggest that a neuron releases the same transmitter at all its processes. Illustrating the dangers of scientifi c sound bites, this principle was soon misinterpreted to indicate that only a single transmitter can be present in a given neuron. This view held sway for about 40 years, when it was no longer possible to dismiss as artifact the data in support of peptide transmitters. We now know that neurons can contain multiple transmitters, including both a classical transmitter and a peptide transmitter. Indeed, it appears that few, if any, neurons contain only one transmitter, and in many cases three or more transmitters are found in a single neuron.The presence of multiple transmitters in single neurons suggests that different transmitters are used by a neuron to signal different functional states to its target cell. For example, the fi ring rates of the neurons differ considerably, and it may be useful to encode fast fi ring by one transmitter and slower fi ring by a different transmitter. The fi ring pattern of neurons also conveys information. For example, a neuron may discharge fi ve times every second on average. This may mean that the cell regularly discharges every 200 ms, but can also represent a cell that has a burst of fi ve discharges during an initial 100-ms period followed by 900 ms of silence. Peptide transmitters often are released at higher fi ring rates and particularly under burst-fi ring patterns.The different synthetic steps in peptides and classical transmitters lead to differential release. Classical transmitters can be replaced rapidly because their synthesis occurs in nerve terminals. In contrast, peptide transmitters must be synthesized in the cell body and transported to the terminal. Thus, it is useful to conserve peptide transmitters for situations of high demand because they would otherwise be depleted rapidly.The restatement of Dales principle by Eccles held that a transmitter is found in all processes of a neuron. In invertebrate species a transmitter can be localized to different parts of a neuron, and it is clear that many proteins in mammalian neurons are distributed in a highly specialized manner. Although differential targeting of transmitters to different processes in mammalian neurons remains to be demonstrated conclusively, if a transmitter were restricted to a particular part of a neuron, the neuron would need multiple transmitters to account for different release sites. Receptors are very specifi c in their locations on neurons, and certain receptors are recruited to "hot spots" on neuronal processes by the activity patterns of presynaptic inputs.The anatomical relations between one cell and its follower may contribute to the need for different transmitters. We typically think of synaptic specializations as the physical substrate of communication between two neurons. However, there may also be nonsynaptic communication between two neurons. This could occur across distances that are larger than conventional synaptic arrangements. In such a situation the requirements for transmitter action would differ from those discussed previously because the distance traversed by the transmitter molecule would be farther than at a synaptic apposition. Thus, transmitters that lack an effi cient reuptake system, such as peptide transmitters, might be favored at nonsynaptic sites. Because a single neuron can form both synaptic and nonsynaptic specializations, a single neuron may require more than one neurotransmitter.Different fi ring rates or patterns may be accompanied by changes in the type or relative amounts of a transmitter being released from a neuron. For example, stimulation of receptors that form ion channels leads to very rapid changes, whereas actions at metabotropic receptors that are coupled to intracellular events through specifi c transduction molecules have slower response characteristics. Differences in temporal response characteristics allow the receptive neuron to respond differently to a stimulus depending on the antecedent activity in the cell. A transmitter can change the response characteristics of a particular cell to subsequent stimuli by seconds or even minutes, and thus short-term changes can occur independent of changes in gene expression.Classical transmitters typically are synthesized in the axon from which they are released. In contrast, genes encoding peptide transmitters give rise to a prohormone, which is incorporated into secretory granules, after which the prohormone is acted on by peptidases to form the peptide transmitter In neurons that use classical transmitters, demands for increased amounts of transmitter are met by increasing local transmitter synthesis. However, increasing the amount of a peptide transmitter requires an increase in gene expression to yield a prohormone, with a subsequent delay in delivery to the axon terminal of the peptide. Thus, classical transmitters respond to increased demand rapidly, but peptide transmitters cannot.The storage of peptides and classical transmitters also differs. Classical neurotransmitters generally are stored in small synaptic vesicles. In contrast, neuropeptide transmitters are stored in large dense core vesicles. Because peptide transmitters typically are released at a high neuronal fi ring frequency or in a burst-fi ring pattern, it is reasonable to assume that there are different mechanisms for the exocytosis and subsequent release of peptide and classical transmitter vesicles. Although the release of peptide transmitters, like that of classical transmitters, is calcium-dependent, distinct but related molecular mechanisms subserve the release of small and large dense core vesicles There are also differences in the inactivation of peptide and classical transmitters. Classical transmitters have high-affi nity reuptake processes to remove the transmitter from the extracellular space. Peptide transmitters are inactivated enzymatically or by diffusion, but lack a high-affi nity active reuptake process. Enzymatic inactivation of peptide transmitters also differs from that of classical transmitters. Peptide transmitters are short chains of amino acids, but the inactivating enzymes are specifi c for certain dipeptide sequences and are not specifi c to any single peptide. For example, an enzyme that inactivates opioid-like peptide transmitters called enkephalins usually is referred to as enkephalinase, but also cleaves other peptide transmitters.A fi nal difference between the inactivation of peptide and classical transmitters is in the fi nal product. When classical transmitters are broken down enzymatically, the metabolites are inactive at the transmitters receptor. However, certain peptide fragments derived from the enzymatic "inactivation" of peptide transmitters are biologically active. An example is angiotensin, in which the angiotensin I is metabolized to yield angiotensin II and III, each successively more active than the parent angiotensin I. It can therefore sometimes be diffi cult to distinguish between transmitter synthesis and transmitter inactivation. The peptide that is stored in vesicles and then released is therefore considered the transmitter, although the actions of certain peptidases may lead to other biologically active fragments.Neurotensin is widely expressed in the central nervous system and in certain peripheral tissues, such as the small intestine. A related peptide, neuromedin N, is also transcribed from the mammalian gene that encodes NT NT and other peptide transmitters are stored in large dense core vesicles, but the general characteristics of NT release are similar to those of classical transmitters. Thus, depolarization evokes the Ca 2 -dependent release of both NT and NMN Peptides are inactivated by enzymatic actions or diffusion. NT is degraded by three endopeptidases, known with great fl air as Although there are no known membrane transporters for peptide transmitters, peptides can be accumulated by neurons. This occurs by internalization of the peptide bound to its receptor. G protein-coupled receptors undergo internalization via an endocytotic mechanism, where they are either recycled to the membrane after various steps or shipped to lysosomes for degradation Neurotensin is colocalized with dopamine in certain hypothalamic and midbrain neurons. The colocalization of NT and DA has provided a useful system in which to explore the interrelationships between two colocalized transmitters. In the prefrontal cortex of the rat, NT is found only in DA axons. Neurotensin release in the prefrontal cortex is increased when neuronal fi ring is increased or when DA neurons enter into a burst-like fi ring pattern The differences between peptide and classical transmitters originally were viewed as inconsistent with a transmitter role of the peptides, and the common acceptance of peptides as transmitters met with considerable resistance. However, once this battle was won, the gate was opened for the consideration of radically different molecules as transmitters.Remarkable technical advances have allowed us to measure substances in the brain that are present in minute quantities or are very unstable. This has forced 7. NEUROTRANSMITTERS II. CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR NEUROSCIENCE us to consider the possibility that substances that do not meet the established requirements for neurotransmitters may indeed be transmitters. What then should be the key attribute of a neurotransmitter One simple approach would be to designate as a neurotransmitter any compound that permits information fl ow from one neuron to another. This defi nition circumvents the matter of glial contribution to the ionic milieu of the neuron, which certainly imparts information concerning the function of the glia. However, this defi nition is similar to that of a hormone and does not address the temporal characteristics of transmitter action and the distance of the target cell from the transmitter release site. Finally, this defi nition does not accommodate unconventional roles for transmitters, such as the regulation of neuronal development or intracellular traffi cking of proteins. We will now discuss what we call, for lack of a better term, "unconventional" transmitters.Nitrates such as nitroglycerine have been long been used to treat angina pectoris, in which chest pain arises because of insuffi cient blood delivery to the heart muscle. Nitrates dilate cardiac blood vessels, thereby increasing blood fl ow and relieving the pain. However, the mechanism by which nitrates dilate coronary arteries was not known until relatively recently. In 1980, an endothelial-derived relaxing factor contained in the cells lining blood vessels was found to potently and rapidly dilate blood vessels. This factor was soon shown to be the gas nitric oxide. In addition, glutamate acting at one type of glutamate receptor was noted to release a factor that caused blood vessels in the brain to dilate. It became apparent that the endothelial-derived relaxing factor and the glutamateinduced factor that caused cerebrovascular vasodilation were the same compound, NO. Thus, NO was present in neurons as well as vasculature. These data led to the proposal that NO may take part in intercellular communication.Nitric oxide is a well-known air pollutant. The idea that an unstable toxic gas could serve as a transmitter led to several incredulous questions, including "how can a gas be stored for release in an impulsedependent manner" The answer is simple: it is not stored. If one accepts the argument that NO is a transmitter, the classical defi nition of a neurotransmitter becomes untenable. Many theories can accommodate one exception. However, NO is not the only gas neurotransmitter carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulfi de play similar transmitter-like roles One of the most rewarding experiences for a scientist is to fi nd that long-held prejudices are altogether wrong and that a new, correct insight reveals a novel scientifi c principle. In the late 1950s, only acetylcholine and the biogenic amines were known to be neurotransmitters. The next decade saw amino acids acknowledged as neurotransmitters. The discovery of enkephalins and endorphins in the mid-1970s reinforced gradually accumulating evidence that peptides are transmitters, and now we fi nd that there are over 100 different bioactive brain peptides.In the 1970s and early 1980s, nitric oxide was found to mediate the ability of macrophages to kill tumor cells and bacteria and to regulate blood vessel relaxation. A short report suggested that NO can be formed in brain tissue. Progress in the NO fi eld at that time was slow because assaying NO synthase, the enzyme that oxidizes the amino acid arginine to NO, was quite tedious, based on the accumulation of nitrite formed from the NO. A much simpler approach was to monitor the conversion of  3 Harginine into  3 Hcitrulline, which is formed simultaneously with NO this assay could process 100 or more samples in an hour. Research on blood vessels revealed that NO acts by stimulating cyclic GMP formation. In the brain, the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate was known to augment cyclic GMP levels. Glutamate, acting through its NMDA receptor, triples NO synthase activity in a matter of seconds, and arginine derivatives that inhibit NOS activity block the elevation of cyclic GMP. This fi nding causally linked the actions of so prominent a neurotransmitter as glutamate to NO.To determine if NO was a neurotransmitter, it was necessary to ascertain whether NOS was localized in neurons. The most straightforward approach would be to generate an antibody to use in anatomical studies. However, purifying NOS protein to generate an antibody proved very diffi cult because the enzyme lost its activity in attempts to purify it. The addition of calmodulin was found to stabilize the enzyme. Because calmodulin is a calcium-binding protein, this fi nding immediately explained how NO formation can be triggered rapidly by synaptic activation through glutamate. When glutamate activates its NMDA receptor, Ca 2 rushes into the cell, binds to calmodulin, and activates NOS.The ability of purifi ed NOS led to antibodies being developed and NOS being localized by immunohistochemistry. The neuronal form of NOS is present in only about 1% of the neurons in the brain. However, these cells give rise to processes that ramify so extensively that probably every neuron in the brain is exposed to NO. The purifi ed NOS protein also allowed an amino acid sequence to be obtained and the gene for the enzyme cloned. The structure of NOS revealed that it is regulated by many more factors than virtually any other enzyme in biology, including at least fi ve oxidative-reductive cofactors, four phosphorylating enzymes, and three binding proteins. This makes sense because of the unique properties of NO as a gaseous neurotransmitter. Most neurotransmitters are stored in vesicles with large storage pools so that only a small amount of the transmitter is released with each nerve impulse. In contrast, every time a neuron wishes to release a molecule of NO, it must BOX 7.2activate NOS-hence, a requirement for exquisitely subtle regulation of the enzyme.Neurotransmitters come in chemical classes such as biogenic amines, amino acids, and peptides. Might there be at least one other gaseous neurotransmitter Carbon monoxide is normally formed in the body by the enzyme heme oxigenase, which is primarily responsible for degrading heme in aging red blood cells. It cleaves the heme ring to form biliverdin, which is reduced rapidly to bilirubin, the pigment that accounts for jaundice in patients with a degradation of red blood cells. When the enzyme cleaves the heme ring, CO is released as a single carbon fragment.The biosynthetic enzyme for a transmitter should be localized to selected neuronal populations. Heme oxigenise-2, the neuronal form of the enzyme, was shown to be localized to discrete neuronal populations throughout the brain. To seek a neurotransmitter function, the peripheral nervous system was used. The myenteric plexus of nerves regulates intestinal peristalsis. A previously unidentifi ed neurotransmitter of myenteric plexus neurons accounts for the relaxation phase of peristalsis. nNOS had already been localized to neurons of the myenteric plexus, and some functional evidence showed that NO might be a neurotransmitter of this pathway. Heme oxigenise-2 was found to be localized to the same myenteric plexus neurons as NOS. Mice with targeted deletions of the genes for nNOS or heme oxigenise-2 were used to elucidate function. In both types of gene knockout mice, intestinal relaxation evoked by neuronal depolarization was reduced about 50%, implying that NO and CO each contribute half of the relaxation. This fi nding, along with other evidence, established transmitter functions for both NO and CO and suggested that they are functioning as cotransmitters, although exactly how they interact remains a mystery. Such a cotransmitter role reminds us of the fact that most neurons in the brain contain at least two and sometimes more neurotransmitters. Thus, in addition to overturning a number of dogmas about neurotransmission, NO and CO may help resolve the riddle of cotransmission.The list of exceptions posed by NO to the dogma of traditional neurotransmitters is long. NO is not stored in cells, is not released in an exocytotic manner, lacks an active process that terminates its action, does not interact with specifi c membrane receptors on target cells, and often acts as a retrograde transmitter to regulate axon terminals presynaptic to the neuron in which NO is synthesized. It is therefore not diffi cult to understand the skepticism that fi rst met the hypothesis that NO is a neurotransmitter, or to have some sympathy for those who expressed the view that NO is not a transmitter but an alien event, benign or otherwise, intent on making neuroscientists question their most cherished beliefs The psychoactive properties of marijuana have been known for thousands of years. However, how marijuana exerts these actions was not uncovered until 1990, when the receptor at which -9-tetrahydrocannabinol, the major active component of marijuana, was cloned. Two years later an endogenous ligand that binds to the cannabinoid receptor was identifi ed. Over the past decade the identifi cation of multiple endocannabinoids, the enzymes involved in synthesizing and degrading endocannabinoids, and the characterization of cannabinoid receptors have led to the realization that ECs serve as chemical messengers between neurons.Endocannabinoids are highly hydrophobic, which allows them to pass easily through plasma membranes, but prevents them from being stored in vesicles. Instead, they are synthesized and released when needed from lipid precursors present in neuronal membranes. There are two major ECs in brain, anadamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol. Anandamide is a fatty acid amide and is the best characterized of the ECs. It is "stored" in the cell membrane in the form of a lipid precursor, from which it is cleaved by the enzyme phospholipase D. 2-AG is more abundant in brain than anadamide, and also is produced from membrane lipids, but via the action of two other enzymes.Three proteins are involved in EC inactivation. Two are enzymes Recent studies have demonstrated that ECs act as retrograde messengers at synapses. Thus, ECs are produced on demand in an activity-dependent manner by a neuron through the cleavage of membrane lipids. The resultant ECs travel backward across the synapse to activate presynaptic cannabinoid receptors on axon terminals, resulting in a suppression of transmitter release. Because the presynaptic CB1 cannabinoid receptor receptor is found on both GABAergic and glutamatergic nerve endings, EC signaling can modulate both excitatory and inhibitory transmission. EC-mediated retrograde signaling appears to be crucial for certain types of short-and long-term synaptic plasticity that underlie learning and memory.Although still early, studies of ECs already have inspired the development of novel treatment strategies for neuropsychiatric disorders. Consistent with subjective reports that marijuana increases eating, early clinical trials have reported some success of CB1 receptor antagonists in the treatment of obesity. Similarly, CB1 antagonists have been advanced as an aide to smoking cessation.We have discussed but two "unconventional" transmitters, one a gas, the other a lipid. This growing category of transmitters contains many other similarly unconventional molecules, including growth factors, neuroactive steroids, and others still to be uncovered. All offer a signifi cant challenge to our defi nitions of what constitutes a neurotransmitter, but with the advantage of expanding our knowledge of how the nervous system works in health and disease.Postsynaptic element Ca 2 channels FIGURE 7.5 Schematic representation of a nitric oxide-containing neuron. NO is formed from arginine by the actions of different nitric oxide synthases. NO diffuses freely across cell membranes and can thereby infl uence both presynaptic neurons or other cells that are not apposed directly to the NOS-containing neuron these other cells can be neurons or glia.Several of the key proteins involved in regulating chemical neurotransmission in mammals have been identifi ed on the basis of homologies to proteins found in invertebrates such as the worm C. elegans and the fl y Drosophila melanogaster. It now appears that some of the molecules used as neurotransmitters even are found in plants, as are their receptors As nervous systems have evolved, many transmitter-related proteins have maintained roles that are not directly related to transmitter function or, alternatively, are involved in less discrete and more spatially elaborate signaling.An example is acetylcholine, the synthesis of which depends on the cytosolic enzyme choline acetyltransferase. ChAT mRNA is also found in the testes, leading to the appearance of ACh in spermatozoa. There is even one form of ChAT that is targeted to the nucleus of cells. ChAT mRNA has also been reported to be present in lymphocytes, as have certain muscarinic cholinergic receptors. Also found in these white blood cells are AChE mRNAs, and decreases in both acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase enzyme activity have been reported in Alzheimers disease. Still another example is the presence of AChE in bone marrow cells and peripheral blood cells in certain leukemias recent data indicate that inhibition of AChE gene expression in bone marrow suppresses apoptosis, or programmed cell death. These examples clearly indicate that although a neurotransmitter may have one role in the brain, a totally different role may emerge in other tissues-thus encouraging us to attend to developments in diverse fi elds.We have discussed chemically-coded synaptic transmission. However, one cannot discuss the biochemistry and pharmacology of synaptic transmission without referring to and appreciating critical information about the structure and function of neurons. Neuroscience is multidisciplinary, requiring an understanding of different aspects of cellular function to come to grips with the basic principles of synaptic communication.Our concepts of synaptic transmission are in fl ux, requiring frequent reevaluation and revision. This can be seen most clearly in the evolving defi nition of a neurotransmitter. Classical transmitters are but one part of the family of transmitters, with other relatives being peptides, gases, growth factors, and lipidderived transmitters such as endocannabinoids. The use of the terms "conventional" and "unconventional" in discussing transmitters is indicative of our current unease with the expanding defi nition of transmitters. This dynamic state of affairs is seen in all areas of neuroscience and helps make neuroscience such an exciting discipline.The communication of information between neurons and between neurons and muscles or peripheral organs requires that signals travel over considerable distances. A number of notable scientists have contemplated the nature of this communication through the ages. In the second century ad, the great Greek physician Claudius Galen proposed that "humors" fl owed from the brain to the muscles along hollow nerves. A true electrophysiological understanding of nerve and muscle, however, depended on the discovery and understanding of electricity itself. The precise nature of nerve and muscle action became clearer with the advent of new experimental techniques by a number of European scientists, including Luigi Galvini, Emil Du Bois-Reymond, Carlo Matteucci, and Hermann von Helmholtz, to name a few With the advancement of electrophysiological techniques, electrical activity recorded from nerves revealed that the conduction of information along the axon was mediated by the active generation of an electrical potential, called the action potential. But what precisely was the nature of these action potentials To know this in detail required not only a preparation from which to obtain intracellular recordings but also one that could survive in vitro. The squid giant axon provided precisely such a preparation. Many invertebrates contain unusually large axons for the generation of escape refl exes large axons conduct more quickly than small ones and so the response time for escape is reduced. The squid possesses an axon approximately 0.5 mm in diameter, large enough to be impaled by even a course micropipette The development of electrophysiological techniques to the point that intracellular recordings could be obtained from the small cells of the mammalian nervous system revealed that action potentials in these neurons are generated through mechanisms similar to that of the squid giant axon.It is now known that action potential generation in nearly all types of neurons and muscle cells is accomplished through mechanisms similar to those fi rst detailed in the squid giant axon by Hodgkin and Huxley. This chapter considers the cellular mechanisms by which neurons and axons generate a resting membrane potential and how this membrane potential briefl y is disrupted for the purpose of propagation of an electrical signal, the action potential.Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition sleep to waking In most types of neurons, hyperpolarization negative to approximately 60 mV activates an ionic current, known as I h , that conducts both Na  and K  ions Could I h play a role in neurons similar to that of I f in the heart Possibly. Synchronized rhythmic oscillations in the membrane potential of large numbers of neurons, in some respects similar to those of the heart, are characteristic of the mammalian brain. Oscillations of this type are particularly prevalent in thalamic relay neurons during some periods of sleep, as mentioned earlier. Intracellular recordings from these thalamic neurons reveal that they often generate rhythmic "bursts" of action potentials mediated by the activation of a slow spike that is generated through the activation of the low-threshold, or transient, Ca 2 current, I T An action potential is generated by the rapid infl ux of Na  ions followed by a slightly slower effl ux of K  ions. Although the generation of an action potential does not disrupt the concentration gradients of these ions across the membrane, the movement of charge is suffi cient to generate a large and brief deviation in the membrane potential. Action potentials typically are initiated in the axon initial segment and the propagation of the action potential along the axon allows communication of the output of the cell to its distant synapses. Neurons possess many different types of ionic channels in their membranes, allowing complex patterns of action potentials to be generated and complex synaptic computations to occur within single neurons.transmitter enters the vesicle. This mechanism is the vesicular transporter protein, which actively accumulates the transmitter though an energydependent process.The vesicle in which the transmitter is stored fuses with the cell membrane and releases the transmitter. Neurons use two pathways to secrete proteins. The release of most neurotransmitters occurs by a regulated pathway that is controlled by extracellular signals. The neurotransmitter release process is discussed more fully in Chapter 8. A second pathway of release is not triggered by extracellular stimulation and is used to secrete membrane components, viral proteins, and extracellular matrix molecules some unconventional transmitters may be synthesized and released by both constitutive and regulated pathways. 4. Binding and recognition of the neurotransmitter by target receptors. Neurotransmitters that are released interact with receptors located on the target cell. Most transmitter receptors fall into two broad classes. The fi rst are membrane proteins called metabotropic receptors, which are coupled to intracellular G proteins as effectors. Ionotropic receptors form channels through which ions such as Na  and Ca 2 fl ow. Receptors can be found on neurons that are postsynaptic to the cell releasing the transmitter. Receptors can also be located on the presynaptic neuron, where they can respond to the transmitter released from the same cell in the case of classical transmitters, or respond to a retrograde signal elaborated from the postsynaptic neuron this latter process has not been described for classical or peptide transmitters. Presynaptic receptors that respond to the transmitter released by the same neuron are termed autoreceptors, and regulate transmitter release, synthesis, or impulse fl ow these autoreceptors can be thought of as homeostatic feedback mechanisms.If a cell cannot terminate the actions of neurotransmitters, dysfunction occurs: sustained activation of postsynaptic targets can result in tetanus or seizures. If one thinks of chemical transmission as being the fl ow of information, continuous unregulated transmitter release is not conveying to the target cell temporal data, such as the rate of fi ring of the presynaptic neuron or the pattern of fi ring of the presynaptic neuron. Neurotransmitter actions may be terminated actively or passively. Among the active termination processes is reuptake of the neurotransmitter through specifi c transporter proteins on the presynaptic neuron or on glial cells. Another common means of the termination of action of a transmitter is by enzymatic degradation to an inactive substance. Finally, inactivation can occur by diffusion of the transmitter from the synaptic region. All three processes probably work cooperatively to terminate the action of a neurotransmitter.  GABA that is released is taken by high-affi nity GABA transporters present on neurons and glia. transaminated to the amino acid glutamate by the enzyme GABA-transaminase. In those cells in which GABA is used as a transmitter, the presence of another enzyme, glutamic acid decarboxylase, generates GABA from glutamate. The presence of GAD therefore serves as an unambiguous marker of a neuron that uses GABA as a transmitter.An unusual feature of GABA synthesis is that intraneuronal GABA is inactivated by the actions of GABA-T, which appears to be associated with mitochondria A major question concerning amino acid transmitters is how the transmitter pool is separately maintained from the general metabolic roles of amino acids. The GABA synthetic enzyme GAD is a cytosolic enzyme, but GABA-T, which converts a-ketoglutarate into the GAD substrate glutamate, is present in mitochondria. Thus, the metabolic pool is present in mitochondria, and glutamate destined for the transmitter pool must be exported from mitochondria to the cytosol. This process is poorly understood.Glutamate is not only a precursor to GABA, but is also the major excitatory neurotransmitter. Why GABA neurons fail to use the precursor glutamate as a transmitter may involve different biosynthetic enzymes for