oping retinal ganglion cells transiently respond to both light on and light off events and their dendritic arbors terminate in both On and Off neuropil laminae. With normal visual experience, the bistratifi ed dendritic arbors are pruned to On and Off laminae. Dark-rearing blocks the normal pruning of dendritic branches in retinal ganglion cells so that retinal ganglion cells remain responsive to On and Off visual stimuli The advent of in vivo time-lapse imaging has allowed the assessment of cellular events underlying the development of dendritic arbors. In vivo imaging of dendritic arbor development was pioneered in the 1980s by Purves and colleagues, who discovered that peripheral neurons could be imaged repeatedly in developing mice In vivo time-lapse imaging studies of newly differentiated neurons in Xenopus and Zebrafi sh optic tectal neurons and peripheral sensory neurons in Drosophila demonstrate that the dendritic arbor develops as a result of a gradual process in which fi ne branches are added and retracted rapidly Synaptic inputs and neurotransmitter activity play a signifi cant role in controlling dendritic arbor development. Whole cell recordings from newly differentiated optic tectal neurons in Xenopus or cortical neurons in turtle demonstrate that they have glutamatergic and GABA-ergic synaptic inputs as soon as they extend their fi rst dendrites Previous work has established a link between NMDA and AMPA receptor function and dendritic branch stabilization, suggesting that synaptic strengthening and structural stability may be mechanistically linked. LTP-inducing stimuli increase both synaptic strength and spine formation The preceding suggests that the molecular mechanisms involved in dendritic morphogenesis concomitantly control glutamate receptor traffi cking to synaptic sites. This suggests a close link between the relative strength of synapses, which depends on the relative contribution of AMPA receptors and the morphology of dendrites These data are among a growing number of reports that support a model in which afferent input operating through AMPA receptors increases dendritic arbor elaboration, potentially through the stabilization of new synapses and new dendritic branches on which they reside. This model is well supported. Glutamate receptors, though favoring arborization at early development stages, actually stimulate branch stabilization at later times, concomitantly with stabilization of local synapses In addition to synaptic activity, neurons exhibit a variety of types of electrical and biochemical activity during the period of dendritic arbor growth. For instance, waves of calcium spread across large populations of neurons throughout the brain, including retina, cortex, and hippocampus The effects of neuronal activity on dendritic development are mediated by calcium signaling. Calcium levels in neurons are regulated by infl ux through calcium channels as well as by release of calcium from intracellular stores. Calcium infl ux is mediated mainly by voltage-sensitive calcium channels, and NMDA receptors. Release from internal stores principally involves calcium-induced calcium release or activation by ligands that lead to the production of IP3, which acts on internal stores. Two major signaling targets of calcium infl ux are calciumcalmodulin dependent protein kinases and mitogenactivated kinase. Upon calcium entry via VSCC or NMDA receptors, calmodulin binds multiple calcium ions and can activate various intracellular effectors, including CaMKs Of the CaMKs, CaMKII has been most extensively studied in relation to a role in dendritic development and function. Two isoforms of CaMKII, CaMKIIa and CaMKIIb, mediate contrasting outcomes on dendrites. CaMKIIa has been reported to stabilize or restrict dendritic growth of frog tectal neurons in vivo and mammalian cortical neurons in vitro Unlike CaMKI, CaMKIIa, and CaMKIIb, CaMKIV is predominately localized in the nucleus. Mice lacking CaMKIV have a defect in dendritic development Although CREB is required for calcium-dependent dendritic growth, activation of CREB is not suffi cient to induce dendritic growth. This suggests that other transcription factors are likely to be involved in mediating activity-dependent dendritic growth. A novel approach for identifying activity-induced transcription factors in cortical neurons led to the discovery of CREST, a calcium-activated transactivator required for dendritic growth Mitogen-activated kinases also are activated by calcium infl ux via NMDA receptors and VSCCs.Repeated depolarization can lead to sustained MAPK activation and infl uences the formation and stability of dendritic fi lopodia A wide variety of signaling pathways participate in dendritic arbor development by regulating different downstream events such as microtubule stability, actin dynamics, Ca  homeostasis, and membrane cycling Another example of divergence comes from the activation of the Ras superfamily GTPases that regulate membrane cycling downstream of neurotransmitter receptor activity. Synaptic NMDA receptors activate the Rab GTPase Rab5 Studies such as those summarized here, aided by computational approaches to map biochemical events in space and time will ultimately lead to a complete appreciation of the signaling pathways that regulate dendritic structural and functional plasticity. Elucidation of these pathways will reveal mechanisms by which activity can rapidly affect dendritic structure, and over more-prolonged time frames, exert profound changes in the so-called intrinsic states of the dendritic tree by modifying gene expression Fragile X mental retardation protein is associated with translating polyribosomes in neuronal cells. J Neurosci 24, Activity-dependent maintenance and growth of dendrites in adult cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102, 4631-4636. Takasu, M. A., Dalva, M. B., Zigmond, R. E., and Greenberg, M. E. Drosophila Dscam is required for divergent segregation of sister branches and suppresses ectopic bifurcation of axons. Neuron 33, 559-571. Wells, D. G., Dong, X., Quinlan, E. M., Differential responses to nerve growth factor and epidermal growth factor in neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells are determined by Rac1 activation systems. J Biol Chem 276, 15298-15305. Yu, T. W. and Early Experience and Sensitive PeriodsThe nervous system has evolved to cope with an environment that is in many ways largely predictable. Therefore, much of the architecture and functional properties of the brain can be specifi ed by genetic determinants that refl ect the common experience of previous generations. Most of this circuitry is established prenatally, guided by genetically determined molecular mechanisms and shaped by patterns of spontaneous impulse activity that propagate through the central nervous system in unborn animals, as discussed in Chapters 17-20.Not all aspects of an animals world are certain, however. Details of an animals physical characteristics vary, as do habitats and social conditions. To deal with such uncertainties, the CNS maintains the capacity to modify its connections based on the interactions of an animal with its environment. Through adaptive adjustments based on use or quality of performance, the developing nervous system customizes its functional properties to the needs and environment of the individual animal with a precision that does not need to be, and sometimes cannot be, encoded in the genome.Although the nervous system is capable of making adaptive adjustments throughout the lifetime of an animal, many neural circuits pass through a period during their development when the capacity for adjustment in response to experience is substantially greater than it is after the circuit has matured. This period is referred to as a sensitive period This chapter introduces four examples of circuits that have been relatively well studied with respect to their dependence on instruction by early experience for normal development. These examples are the circuits involved in song learning in songbirds, sound localization in owls, binocular representation in the visual cortex, and temperament in rats. Sensitive periods for language learning in humans and fi lial imprinting in birds are also discussed. These examples are used to illustrate principles that govern sensitive periods. Finally, factors that contribute to the extraordinary capacity of the nervous system for adaptive change during sensitive periods are discussed.The song of most songbirds depends on learning that occurs early in life during a sensitive period Songs are passed on from one generation to the next by a combination of genetic instruction and learning. In a few species of songbirds, the infl uence of genetic instruction is strong and learning plays a relatively Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition minor role. In most, however, the role of learning is paramount. Some of these species learn new songs each year, whereas others learn their songs only once early in life. In the latter case, the birds memorize the song they will sing as adults during a sensitive period.White-crowned sparrows and zebra fi nches are species that learn their songs during a sensitive period Song learning in these species illustrates an important principle that pertains to most sensitive period learning: The nervous system is genetically predisposed to accept only a limited range of potential stimuli as appropriate for learning Song learning involves two components: song memorization and vocal learning. In white-crowned sparrows, these components are separated by many months The sensitive period for song memorization begins at about 2 weeks of age and lasts for about 8 weeks in both zebra fi nches and white-crowned sparrows When a baby bird is deprived continuously of appropriate auditory experience, its capacity to memorize song eventually diminishes with age. Under these conditions, the sensitive period closes gradually because of additional, age-dependent factors that reduce the plasticity of the relevant circuits. As a bird approaches this age, experience with appropriate stimuli must be richer in order to have an effect. For example, white-crowned sparrows raised in acoustic isolation until 50 days of age no longer memorize songs presented from loudspeakers, but do memorize songs presented by live tutors. Thus, enrichment of the sensory experience provided by social interactions with the tutor overcomes the decline in the facility of the pathway for song memorization.Learning to sing requires a combination of vocal practice and auditory feedback. A young bird that is deafened after song memorization but before the onset of vocal learning, and is thereby prevented from hearing its own voice, will not develop a normal song The neural mechanisms that underlie song memorization are being explored in many laboratories but, as yet, we know little about this aspect of song learning. In contrast, a great deal is known about the neural mechanisms that underlie song production. The pathway for song production was identifi ed by its sexual dimorphism in species in which only males sing. In these species, a distinct set of nuclei, referred to as the song system, is conspicuously hypertrophied in males The anterior pathway In young birds, the anterior pathway provides information to the vocal motor pathway for the purpose of vocal learning. According to one hypothesis, the anterior pathway compares auditory feedback about the song that a bird produces with a stored template of the memorized song. The result of this comparison is then used to instruct the development and maintenance of connections in the vocal motor pathway. Consistent with this hypothesis, Area X and the LMAN in the anterior pathway contain neurons that respond maximally to the sound of the birds own song. During development, axons from the LMAN are the fi rst to innervate the RA in the vocal motor pathway. Information transmitted by the LMAN-RA pathway is mediated predominantly by NMDA receptors, a class of glutamate receptors that, when activated, is known in other systems to induce synaptic plasticity. As birds begin learning to sing, a second set of axons enters the RA from the HVC in the vocal motor pathway and begins making glutamatergic synapses. These later connections may be guided by the activity of the preexisting, LMAN-RA synapses.The period of vocal learning closes as birds reach sexual maturity and circulating levels of steroid hormones rise. An abrupt increase in androgen hormones triggers the termination of the period of vocal learning. Exposure of a juvenile bird to high levels of testosterone causes its song to "crystallize" prematurely in an abnormal state A cellular link between sex hormones and song plasticity has been found in the LMAN. Neurons in the LMAN, as well as in the HVC, RA, and hypoglossal nuclei, bind and accumulate androgens. As the period of vocal learning closes, the density of dendritic spines on LMAN neurons decreases dramatically, suggesting that synaptic selection has taken place. In addition, the total volume of the LMAN regresses precipitously and the infl uence of LMAN activity on the song motor nuclei declines Seasonal song learners, such as canaries, appear to recapitulate the process of song memorization and vocal learning each year. This relearning is linked with, and could result from, the waxing and waning of steroid hormone levels. This raises the intriguing possibility that these sensitive periods can be opened and closed by hormonal or environmental factors.Song learning in birds shares many characteristics with language learning in humans. Song is a learned form of vocal communication used by certain species of birds to attract mates, defend their territories, and identify their neighbors. Songs are learned in two phases. The fi rst is song memorization, which for many species takes place during a sensitive period. The second is vocal learning, during which vocal practice and auditory feedback shape the birds song to match the memorized song. The neural pathway for song production is sexually dimorphic in many species in which only males sing. A separate pathway, in the anterior forebrain, plays a special role in vocal learning, guiding adjustments in the song production pathway as the bird learns to sing.A pathway that is highly modifi able during a sensitive period is the auditory pathway that creates a map of space in the midbrain of the barn owl Many human capabilities depend critically on experience gained during early life. These capabilities range from fundamental capacities, such as stereoscopic vision, visual acuity, and binocular coordination, to high-level capacities, such as social behavior, language, and the ability to perceive forms and faces. In each case, normal experience during a restricted period in early life is essential for the normal development of the capacity. The rules that govern these sensitive periods appear to be the same as those that govern sensitive periods in other animals, as described in the text.The best known and most thoroughly studied sensitive period in humans is for language Only certain aspects of language are affected by learning during sensitive periods Physiological measures reveal an age dependence in the way in which language is processed and represented in the brain Detailed knowledge of the mechanisms that control sensitive periods and of the plasticity that occurs during sensitive periods will provide a basis for formulating optimal therapeutic procedures to help minimize longterm harmful effects of early abnormal experience, associated with neonatal and childhood disabilities, for example, and maximize the acquisition of normal function once normal conditions are restored. Such knowledge may also lead to improved methods of rearing and teaching normal children that take advantage of the full capacity of the central nervous system to learn from experience.References Dehaena, S., Doupoux, E., Mehler, J., Cohen, L., Perani, D., Acad. Sci. USA 97, 11850-11857. then sent on to the optic tectum, the avian analog of the mammalian superior colliculus, where it aligns with and is integrated with a visual map of space. The function of this pathway is to extract spatial information from sound that can be used to direct orienting movements of the eyes and head toward auditory stimuli. The pathway derives the location of a sound source by evaluating spatial cues that are present in the auditory signals at the two ears. The most reliable cues for sound localization are interaural timing differences and interaural level differences. ITDs are due to the difference in the path length that sound must travel to reach the near versus the far ear. Because the ears are on the sides of the head, ITD varies systematically with the horizontal location of a sound source In creating the map of auditory space, the nervous system can only roughly anticipate the relationship between encoded values of ITD and ILD and the locations of sound sources that produce them. The correspondence of ITDs and ILDs with locations in space changes with the size and shape of the head and ears, features that vary across individuals, as well as for a given individual during growth. Moreover, the encoded values of sound timing and level that are transmitted to the CNS depend on the sensitivity and transduction properties of each ear, and these properties can change over time. Therefore, to establish and maintain an accurate map of space in the optic tectum, this midbrain pathway must learn the exact relationship between the encoded cue values and the locations of sound sources that produce them.The infl uence of early experience on the owls auditory space map has been demonstrated using a variety of techniques that change the relationship between cue values and locations in space: For example, the external ears have been altered drastically or the auditory canal of one ear has been plugged chronically The ascending auditory pathway to the optic tectum in the barn owl. Auditory inputs enter the optic tectum from the brain stem these inputs already encode frequency-specifi c information about interaural time difference. These inputs project into the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus, where they are organized topographically by frequency. Bands in the ICC represent these frequencies. Neurons in the ICC convey information both to the auditory thalamus and to the external nucleus of the inferior colliculus. In the ICX, ITD information is combined across frequency channels to synthesize a map of auditory space. For example, an ITD of 0 ms is generated by sound stimuli directly in front of the animal, such that sound reaches the two ears at exactly the same time. At the position marked 0 ms in the ICX are neurons that respond maximally to sounds with an ITD value of 0 ms and thus respond selectively to sounds originating in front of the animal. Sounds originating, for example, from positions that are further to the left-hand side will reach the ears with progressively greater left ear-leading ITDs and thus stimulate neurons with progressively larger best ITDs. From the ICX, the auditory map of space is conveyed via a topographic projection to the optic tectum. Here the auditory map is aligned and merged with a visual map of space to produce a multimodal space map.This pathway transforms a representation of auditory spatial cues that exists in the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus into a topographic representation of space in the external nucleus of the inferior colliculus. The auditory map of space is An instructive signal that adjusts the tuning of ICX and tectal neurons is provided by the visual system. The instructive role of vision in guiding the tuning of ICX and tectal neurons has been demonstrated in experiments in which owls wear optical displacing prisms that chronically shift the visual fi eld This adaptive auditory plasticity is regulated developmentally. The magnitude of the shift in neuronal ITD tuning that is induced under standard conditions of prism experience depends greatly on the age of the animal , the site in the pathway where the plasticity actually takes place is in the ICX:The maps of ITD in the ICX and in the optic tectum are shifted by equivalent amounts in prism-reared owls, whereas the representation of ITD in the ICC remains unaltered.A shift of the auditory space map that occurs during the sensitive period is associated with a change in the architecture of the neurons that project from the ICC to the ICX The newly learned responses that result from prism experience are mediated differentially by a special class of glutamate receptor, the n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor. Drugs that specifi cally block this receptor, such as AP5, eliminate or severely reduce the responses of ICX neurons to newly learned values of ITD while having substantially less effect on their responses to the normal value. Thus, the expression of newly learned responses in this pathway depends heavily on the activation of NMDA receptors. The action of NMDA receptors plays a critical role in many other examples of experience-dependent plasticity as well.As mentioned earlier, large shifts in ITD tuning in response to visual fi eld displacement occur only in juvenile owls during a sensitive period. In contrast, removal of prisms from adult owls that have been raised from the day of eye opening wearing prisms results in a shift of the map of ITD back to normal. The genetically programmed, normal circuitry persists into adulthood even without validation by experience. In owls that have been raised with prisms, the adult circuit is able to switch back and forth, over a period of weeks, from an abnormal representation of ITD to a normal representation of ITD and vice versa, depending on the visual world the animal experiences. In this case, acquired alterations in circuit architecture resulting from experience during the sensitive period, together with the genetically programmed circuit architecture, infl uence the range of connectional states that the circuit can assume later in adult life.The brain derives the location of a sound source by evaluating spatial cues that are present in the auditory signals at the two ears. Interaural timing differences and interaural level differences are used to determine the position of a sound in space. In owls, this information is used to create a map of auditory space, which is aligned closely with a visual map of space in the optic tectum. Establishing and maintaining the alignment of the auditory space map with the visual space map in the optic tectum is an active process, guided by information provided by experience. The capacity of this pathway to change adaptively in response to experience is particularly great during a sensitive period. Plasticity during the sensitive period involves changes in circuit architecture and depends on the action of the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptor.In the mammalian nervous system, visual information from the two eyes fi rst comes together at the level of the primary visual cortex. As described in detail in Chapter 27, visual experience during a limited period early in life has an enormous impact on how much of the visual cortex is devoted to processing input from each eye and the degree to which binocular inputs are combined Soon after birth, a developmental period opens during which visual experience infl uences the competition among LGN afferents for territory in layer 4. As long as the eyes are coordinated and used equally, the typical fi nal state, consisting of equally wide ocular dominance columns, is achieved abnormally large portion of the cortex. As a consequence, activity throughout most of the visual cortex becomes driven by LGN afferents from the normal eye Cellular mechanisms by which binocular experience during this sensitive period shapes the architecture and functional properties of neurons in the visual cortex are described in Chapter 20. In brief, the dramatic change in functional properties in layer 4 is accompanied by an equally dramatic change in the axonal architecture of the LGN neurons that project to layer 4: axonal arbors conveying input from the normal eye expand while those conveying input from the impaired eye shrink. The anatomical remodeling of LGN axons depends on the availability of neurotrophins-BDNF and NT-4-as well as on the expression of their cognate receptor, TrkB Because the effects of disruptions of binocular vision on ocular representation in the visual cortex are apparently irreversible when they occur during this limited period in early life, this period has been referred to in the literature as a critical period. The critical period for ocular representation in the visual cortex has been studied particularly carefully in cats by measuring the age dependence of the effects of monocular eyelid closure The close of the critical period in cats can be delayed substantially by raising animals in complete darkness. At the beginning of the critical period, most cortical neurons respond to inputs from either eye, but the responses tend to be weak. In cats that are raised in the dark until well past the end of the critical period, cortical neurons continue to be driven binocularly and their responses remain weak. When these animals are fi nally allowed visual experience, the responses of these neurons gradually increase in strength and the relative representations of the left and right eyes is shaped by the animals FIGURE 22.8 The critical period for ocular representation in the primary visual cortex of the cat. The degree of functional disconnection of cortical neurons from the deprived eye is quantifi ed and plotted as a function of the kittens age at the time of monocular closure. Chronic monocular closure lasted 10 to 12 days. Each point represents data from a single animal. Functional disconnection was based on the ocular dominance distribution The critical period for ocular representation in the cortex is atypical in one respect: There is no predisposition to establish a normal pattern of connectivity based on normal experience. Even after baby cats or monkeys have experienced normal binocular vision for several weeks, monocular deprivation still causes the responses in the cortex to become dominated by the nondeprived eye The representation of the two eyes in layer 4 of the primary visual cortex is shaped by binocular experience during a sensitive period. During prenatal development and before the onset of vision, thalamic inputs representing the left and right eyes segregate from each other to form ocular dominance columns of roughly equal width in the visual cortex. Soon after birth, a period opens during which the visual experience of the animal shapes the representations of the two eyes in the cortex. Normal binocular vision consolidates and refi nes the established patterns of ocular representation. Impaired vision in one eye, however, causes the LGN axons in layer 4 carrying information from the impaired eye to shrink and their synapses to loose effi cacy, whereas axons carrying information from the normal eye expand and their synapses increase in effi cacy. In contrast, equivalent, monocular deprivation in adult animals has no apparent effect. The critical period for ocular representation in the visual cortex can be extended by rearing animals in complete darkness.The way in which a rat pup is cared for by its mother during a sensitive period has an enormous impact on a rats temperament as an adult Different rats respond differently to threatening situations. For example, when introduced into a new environment, some rats are calm and adventurous, whereas others are anxious and fearful. This fundamental difference in emotional responses to stressors refl ects, in part, a rats interactions with its mother during the fi rst week after birth Cross-fostering experiments demonstrate that the transmission of these traits is dominated by FIGURE 22.9 A rat mother grooms her pups during the fi rst week after their birth. This interaction permanently affects the temperament of these rat pups.experience, and not by genetics. Rats born to lowgrooming mothers, but raised by high-grooming mothers, become themselves calm, adventurous, high-grooming mothers. Conversely, rats born to high-grooming mothers, but raised by low-grooming mothers, become anxious, low-grooming mothers. Thus, the transmission of these traits depends on mother-infant interactions during the fi rst week of a rats life. The experiments demonstrate that, although genetics constrains the ranges of these traits, early experience can modify them dramatically.The emotional responses of a rat to stressors refl ect the reactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system. Activation of the HPA system leads to the release of a special class of stress hormones, glucocorticoid hormones, from the adrenal glands. Animals with high circulating levels of glucocorticoid hormones are anxious and fearful, those with low circulating levels of this hormone are calm.The hippocampus exerts a powerful negative feedback on the release of glucocorticoid hormones from the adrenal glands. High levels of GRs in the hippocampus result in low basal levels of glucocorticoids and tight regulation of glucocorticoid release when an animal is stressed. Low levels of GRs in the hippocampus have the opposite effects.The expression level of GRs in the hippocampus is adjusted by interactions of a rat pup with its mother. Rats raised by high-grooming mothers express high levels of GRs in the hippocampus, whereas rats raised by low-grooming mothers express low levels of GRs. The same effect is observed in experiments in which mothering behavior is manipulated. For example, removing rat pups from a mother for 15 minutes and then returning them to the mother, causes the mother to increase her grooming of those pups. Rats that experience this increase in grooming express increased levels of GRs in the hippocampus compared with control animals correspondingly, they are less reactive to stressors, less fearful, and more adventurous. This manipulation has these effects only when applied during the fi rst two weeks after birth.One mechanism that mediates the effect of mothering on GR levels in the hippocampus, and therefore on an animals reactivity to stressors, is the methylation of the GR gene. Methylation silences the GR gene by blocking access of transcription factors to a promoter region of the gene. Gene promoter methylation is adjusted during development and is stable thereafter. Experience during the fi rst week after birth with a high-grooming mother A second mechanism that contributes to the effect of mothering on GR levels in the hippocampus is the acetylation of histones. Acetylation of histones in the chromatin of a gene increases the access of transcription factors to promoters. Histones within the nucleosome core that includes the GR gene are more acetylated in rats reared by high-grooming mothers than in rats reared by low-grooming mothers, an effect that increases the transcription of the GR gene and raises GR levels in the hippocampus. The difference in histone acetylation is thought to be driven by the difference in the methylation state of the GR gene, discussed earlier.The contribution of histone acetylation to controlling GR levels in the hippocampus has been tested by administering an inhibitor of histone deacetylation to adult rats that had been reared by low-grooming mothers. The inhibitor increased acetylation of the histones surrounding the GR gene, increasing access of demethylating enzymes to the gene. The inhibitor thereby caused a decrease in the methylation state of the gene, which increased GRs in the hippocampus and changed the temperament of the adult rats into the calm, adventurous temperament typical of rats raised by high-grooming mothers.Interactions of a rat with its mother during the fi rst week of life shape the way in which a rat responds to stressful situations as an adult. The primary mechanism for this effect is an experience-dependent adjustment of the expression level of the GR gene in the hippocampus. High maternal care during the fi rst postnatal week causes a demethylation of a GR gene promoter, resulting in a stable increase in GR gene expression in the hippocampus and a consequent decrease in basal levels of glucocorticoid hormones and a tighter regulation glucocorticoid hormone release in response to stressors. As a result, the animal is calm, adventurous, and reacts in a measured fashion to stressors. Maternal behavior has these effects only during a sensitive period in a rats development when the methylation state of the GR gene can be altered. Thereafter, the methylation state of the GR gene remains stable throughout adulthood.During the later stages in the maturation of many neural circuits, patterns of neuronal activity, driven by stimuli or the animals behavior, shape the circuits functional properties, architecture, andor biochemistry. This shaping process selects circuit properties that are appropriate for the individuals experience.Circuit changes that occur during sensitive periods differ from those that occur in adulthood in terms of their magnitude and persistence and the behavioral conditions under which the changes can occur. As illustrated by the preceding examples in this chapter, sensitive period experience can cause changes in the nervous system that are beyond the range of changes that occur in adults, and the changes that result typically persist for the lifetime of the animal.Changes in circuit properties are far more readily induced during sensitive periods than in mature circuits. During sensitive periods, circuits may be altered simply by exposing animals to unusual conditions such as monocular deprivation, for example. In mature circuits, equivalent conditions either have no effect or require the attention of the animal to the conditions in order for plasticity to occur.Sensitive period learning is infl uenced heavily by genetic predispositions. Only a limited range of stimuli is allowed to operate as an instructive infl uence for a particular circuit. Within this acceptable range, some stimuli are preferred over others. This property is well illustrated by song learning in birds and by imprinting. The predisposition of the nervous system to be instructed by "normal" experience probably originates in the selectivity of the response properties, genetically determined as well as shaped by experience, of the neurons that provide input to the sites in the pathway where the learning take place. As learning progresses, the selectivity of the pathway for acceptable input becomes progressively higher.Whether a particular pathway passes through a sensitive period can vary across species. For example, some songbirds, such as canaries and mockingbirds, learn new songs seasonally throughout life, whereas others, such as white-crowned sparrows and zebra fi nches, learn their songs only during a sensitive period. Such species differences may provide a useful tool for uncovering the mechanisms that are responsible for sensitive periods.The magnitude of changes that may result from experience-driven adjustments varies greatly across circuits and across species. The magnitude of changes depends on the degree of genetic specifi cation of the inputs to the site of change. When the selection of appropriate inputs is from a large potential range of inputs, the effect of experience can have a profound infl uence on a circuit. Conversely, when the range of potential inputs is highly restricted by genetic specification, the effect of experience is correspondingly small.The duration of different sensitive periods also varies greatly. At one end of the spectrum are the sensitive periods for imprinting, which may open and close within hours Sensitive periods cannot open until the brain has matured to the point where three conditions are met. First, the information provided to the circuit from lower level circuits must be suffi ciently reliable and precise to allow the circuit to carry out its function. Second, the circuits connectivity must have matured adequately for it to process the information. For example, the critical period in the visual cortex does not open until and unless inhibitory as well as excitatory connections are effective. Third, the mechanisms that enable plasticity must be active.Because complex behaviors depend on information that is processed through hierarchies of circuits, the fi rst condition implies that sensitive periods for circuits at higher levels in these hierarchies cannot open until the information from circuits at lower levels has become reliable. Sensitive periods for low-level circuits, such as the LGN, occur earlier than sensitive periods for higher level circuits, such as those in the visual cortex. The same principle holds for circuits at different levels in the owls sound localization pathway. Thus, pathways that support complex behaviors, such as human language or object recognition, may rely on circuits that pass through sensitive periods that end at very different stages in an animals life.Experience cannot shape a circuit until the mechanisms that enable plasticity are active. Experiencedriven changes in functional properties can involve a For many species of birds and mammals, including ducks, geese, mice, and monkeys, parental care is essential for the survival of the young. The young of these species learn rapidly to distinguish their parents from all other individuals and form a unique and close relationship with their parents from that point on-a process referred to as fi lial imprinting The visual component of the learning process usually is preceded by auditory, olfactory, andor gustatory components. In many species, the babies learn to recognize the vocalizations of the mother based on experience that begins before or soon after the animal is born. In addition, babies may learn the odor andor taste of the mother from the odors and tastes experienced immediately after birth. The recognition of the parent based on acoustic andor chemical cues helps the young select the correct individual for visual imprinting, once the eyes and nervous system are capable of adequate form vision.Sensitive periods for fi lial imprinting are relatively discrete and can be as short as a few hours in some species As in other examples of learning during sensitive periods, young animals exhibit an innate preference to imprint on normal stimuli. When given a choice, babies in the process of imprinting attend preferentially to images that more closely resemble members of their own species. Thus, when baby ducks are given the choice of imprinting on geese or on people, they imprint on the geese. This predisposition is based on genetically programmed preferences for simple, conspicuous features, referred to as sign stimuli by ethologists, that tend to distinguish the species from all others. This implies that the neural circuitry involved in fi lial imprinting, like that involved in song learning in songbirds, contains genetically determined neuronal fi lters that help identify stimuli that are appropriate models for learning. As imprinting proceeds, learning causes these fi lters to become more selective until ultimately the young are capable of discriminating one individual from all others.Imprinting results in rapid functional and structural changes in a specifi c part of the forebrain of birds remodeling of axons and dendrites, an elaboration of new synapses, an adjustment of synaptic effi cacies, andor a regulation of gene expression. Anatomical remodeling and the establishment of new synapses may well be guided by the same mechanisms that control synaptogenesis during circuit development. Neurotrophins, particularly BDNF for example, are essential for anatomical remodeling during the critical period in the visual cortex Sensitive periods end once an animal has received adequate experience and the relevant circuit is irreversibly committed to a pattern of connectivity. The factors that render the commitment irreversible are not known. Many factors may play a role, and the factors that are most important may differ across different pathways.One factor that may contribute to the closing of sensitive periods is the age-or experience-dependent alteration of molecular mechanisms that support changes in synaptic effi cacy such as LTP and LTD, described in Chapter 49. In addition, in those circuits in which axonal elaboration is a necessary component of experience-dependent changes in connectivity, loss of the mechanisms that support axonal growth would end the sensitive period. In the visual cortex of cats, for example, levels of the growth-associated protein GAP-43, which is thought to be necessary for axonal growth, decrease precipitously during the critical period. A host of other molecular mechanisms could contribute to a decline in plasticity, including the loss of responsiveness of presynaptic axonal arbors to neurotrophins secreted by postsynaptic neurons, the stabilization of synapses by the extracellular matrix or by proteoglycans, the myelination of axons, the appearance of molecules that prevent growth, and the disappearance of molecules that enable growth.Another major factor that decreases the plasticity of circuits is the experience-driven sharpening of functional tuning. Initially in development, neuronal responses are relatively weak and broadly tuned. Experience causes selective changes in anatomical connections and synaptic effi cacy that refi ne the patterns of both excitatory and inhibitory connections. These changes are self-reinforcing due to the action of selforganizational mechanisms that operate by Hebbian principles. As a result, once a circuit has been shaped to process information in a certain way, it becomes far more diffi cult for altered experience to induce new patterns of connectivity.Sensitive periods typically close once an animal receives adequate experience. Therefore, when an animal is deprived of appropriate experience, the sensitive period is prolonged. For example, raising songbirds in acoustic isolation prolongs the sensitive period for song memorization, and raising cats in complete darkness prolongs the critical period for ocular representation in the visual cortex. This characteristic of sensitive periods indicates that the event that triggers sensitive period adjustments is the powerful and repeated activation of neurons at the site where changes take place. Without the vigorous activation of these neurons, the pathway remains in an uncommitted state and capable of adjusting in response to experience when it becomes available. This characteristic suggests that for young animals suffering from a peripheral or central abnormality, a total absence of relevant input is far better than abnormal input. This implies that the optimal therapeutic strategy for such individuals is to deprive them of relevant sensory input until the abnormality is corrected. Otherwise, an abnormal sensory experience may close the sensitive period, resulting in a commitment to an abnormal pattern of connectivity that cannot later be reversed.Early experience shapes the functional properties, architecture, and biochemistry of many circuits so that the properties of these circuits are appropriate for the needs and the environment of the individual animal. The changes in circuit properties that occur during a sensitive period differ quantitatively, if not qualitatively, from those that occur in mature circuits. First, they occur readily only during a restricted period in the lifetime of the animal. Second, they involve the selection of particular circuit properties from a wide range of possible properties. Third, the changes in circuit properties that occur during sensitive periods typically do not require the attention of the animal. Fourth, the changes persist throughout life.Sensitive periods vary in timing and duration across pathways and across species some last only a few hours, whereas others last until the individual reaches sexual maturity. Sensitive periods open once the information conveyed to a circuit is suffi ciently precise and the circuit is competent to process the information and to undergo plastic change. The signal that induces change is probably the repeated, vigorous activation of postsynaptic neurons by presynaptic activity representing the occurrence of an appropriate stimulus or the execution of adaptive behavior. The range of stimuli that are effective in driving plastic change is specifi ed by genetic preprogramming, with most pathways biased heavily to prefer normal patterns of stimulation.After a sensitive period closes, equivalent conditions have much less effect on the architecture, biochemistry, and functional properties of a circuit. The closure of a sensitive period may be triggered by experience itself or as a consequence of circuit maturation. The mechanisms that close a sensitive period probably vary for different circuits. When experience-induced changes require anatomical remodeling, the end of the sensitive period may be controlled by factors that regulate cell growth when the induced changes require adjustments in synaptic effi cacy, the sensitive period will be controlled by factors that infl uence the capacity of synapses to modify their effi cacy and when the induced changes involve adjustments in the levels of specifi c receptors, the sensitive period will be controlled mechanisms that regulate the expression of receptors.In bringing information about the world to an individual, sensory systems perform a series of common functions. At its most basic, each system responds with some specifi city to a stimulus and each employs specialized cells-the peripheral receptors-to translate the stimulus into a signal that all neurons can use. Because of their physical or chemical specialization, the many types of receptors transduce the energy in light, heat, mechanical, and chemical stimulation into a change in membrane potential. That initial electrical event begins the process by which the central nervous system constructs an orderly representation of the body and of things visible, audible, or chemical. To bridge the distance between peripheral transduction and central representation, messages are carried along lines dedicated to telling the CNS what has taken place in the external world and where it has happened. Such precision requires that labor be divided among neurons so that not only different stimulus energies but also different stimulus qualities are analyzed by separate groups of neurons.In addition to their organization along labeled lines, sensory systems perform common types of operations. Foremost among these is the ability of each system to compare events that occur simultaneously at different receptors, a process that serves to bring out the greatest response where the difference in stimulus strength is greatest. At late stages in sensory processing, systems make comparisons with past events and with sensations received by other sensory systems. These comparisons are the fundamental bases of perception, recognition, and comprehension.This chapter gives an overview of the functional attributes and patterns of organization displayed by the auditory, olfactory, somatosensory, gustatory, and visual systems and it outlines the physiological and anatomical principles common to all sensory systems. When variations on a common theme exist, they are discussed with the goal of bringing the general pattern into sharper focus.Because of the changes that occur around an individual, each sensory system has the task of providing a constantly updated representation of the external world. Accomplishing this task is no simple feat because it requires a close interaction between ascending or stimulus-driven mechanisms and descending or goal-directed mechanisms. Together these two mechanisms evoke sensations, give rise to perceptions, and activate stored memories to form the basis of conscious experience. Ascending mechanisms begin with the activity of peripheral receptors, which together form an initial neural representation of the external world. Descending mechanisms work to sort out from the large amount of sensory input those events that require immediate attention. In doing so, the descending mechanisms alter ascending inputs in ways that optimize perception.Perception of a sensory experience can change even though the input remains the same. A classic example is seen in the image of a vase that can also be perceived as two faces, pointed nose to nose A psychophysical experiment determines the quantitative relationship between a stimulus and a sensation in order to establish the limits of sensory performance Some general principles hold for all sensation measured in psychophysical experiments. As pointed out in the preceding paragraph, one principle is that of threshold for detecting a difference between stimuli. Studies look to determine a difference threshold by asking what a just noticeable difference between two stimuli is that an observer can detect. E. Weber was the fi rst to formally recognize that small differences between two minimal stimuli are easier to detect than small differences between two robust stimuli. One example is the ability to detect a difference between two light objects that weigh 0.1 and 0.2 kilograms versus a difference between two heavy objects that weigh 10.1 and 10.2 kilograms. The former is much easier than the latter. Webers law states that the difference threshold for a stimulus is a constant fraction of intensity. The formula, II  k, describes that law, where I is the intensity of a baseline stimulus, I is the JND between baseline and a second stimulus, and k is the Weber fraction. It is important to recognize that k may be a constant of a particular value for one feature, such as the frequency of sound, but the value changes markedly for another feature of the same sense. The Weber fraction for sound frequency is exceedingly low whereas that for sound pressure level is relatively high. For purposes of comparison, the Weber fraction for luminance is 0.02 and that for concentration of an odorant molecule is 0.10.G. Fechner proposed that every JND between one stimulus and the next is an equal increment in the magnitude of sensation. That would mean a JND is proportional to a physical variable. His law is formalized in the equation, S  klog I, where S is the sensory experience in terms of magnitude, I is the physically measured intensity of a stimulus and k is a constant. There is strong intuitive value to this equation as it states the magnitude of a sensory experience is related logarithmically to the physical intensity. Lifting 1 kg and 2 kg produces very different sensory experiences, but lifting 10 kg and 11 kg produces almost the same experience, even though the added weight was equal in the two cases. S. Stevens recognized a century later that rather than a logarithmic relation, perceived sen- IV. SENSORY SYSTEMS sation and physical intensity were related by a power function, described by the equation S  kI P . Yet the exponent of I could be infi nite, depending on the relationship of neural response to stimulus intensity. V. Mountcastle and his colleagues proposed that for mechanosensation the relationship between the physical properties of a stimulus and the response of individual neurons is linear. And most recently, K. Johnson and his colleagues have shown that for the complex percept of roughness perception, a linear relationship exists between subjective experience and neural activity. Thus a basic law of psychophysics emerges: how an observer perceives a stimulus is a linear function of the intensity of that stimulus.Neurons of the brain and spinal cord do not respond when they are touched or when they are exposed to sound or light or odors. Each form of energy must be transduced by a population of specialized cells, which converts the stimulus into a signal that all neurons understand. In every sensory system, cells that perform this transduction step are called receptors Systems differ in the number of distinct receptor types they incorporate, and a correlation exists between the number of receptor types displayed by a system and the types of stimuli that system is able to detect. In the somatosensory system, a large number of receptor types exist to detect many types of stimuli. Separate receptors exist to transduce a variety of mechanical stimuli, including steady indentation of hairless skin, deformation of hair, vibration, increased or decreased skin temperature, tissue destruction, and stretch of muscles or tendons receptor protein.As that protein varies so does the ORNs sensitivity to odorant molecules.All receptors transduce the energy to which they are sensitive into a change in membrane voltage. The task of the receptor is to transmit that voltage change by one route or another to a class of neurons-usually referred to as ganglion cells-that send their axons into the brain or spinal cord Receptors of the auditory, visual, and gustatory systems are separate, specialized cells that transduce a stimulus and then transmit the resulting signal to the nearby process of a neuron. Because the distances between receptor and target neuron are short, auditory hair cells, photoreceptors, and taste receptors do not generate action potentials but signal their response by a passive fl ow of current. These systems differ, however, in the path between receptor and ganglion cell. In the cochlea, auditory receptors form chemical synapses directly with the processes of ganglion cells so that the response properties of inner hair cells are conveyed directly to the ganglion cells on which they synapse. A similar arrangement is seen for taste receptors and the axons of ganglion cells from cranial nerves VII, IX, and X. Taste receptors synapse directly onto ganglion cell axons. For these systems, the synapse between a receptor and a ganglion cell is little more than the conversion of an analog signal into a digital signal. That is not the case in the retina, where photoreceptors relay their response through populations of interneurons interposed between them and retinal ganglion cells The mechanisms whereby receptors transduce and transmit signals are known in greater or lesser detail for each system. Visual transduction is a wellunderstood, rapid process in which a weak signal can be amplifi ed greatly through a biochemical cascade, leading to the closure of thousands of Na  channels and a hyperpolarizing response Receptors are not scattered randomly across the sensory surface. An orderly arrangement of receptors exists along the skin, basilar membrane, retina, olfactory epithelium, and the lining of the tongue and throat. In the retina, for example, photoreceptors adopt a hexagonal packing array A perfect test case for innervation density and acuity is seen in the auditory system of microbats. Because these animals use echolocation to navigate and fi nd prey the auditory system greatly overrepresents the frequencies of sound a bat emits as a probing signal and the surrounding frequencies of Doppler-shifted sounds that echo from objects. Throughout most of the cochlea, the physical properties of the basilar membrane change in a steady fashion so that cochlear hair cells display a progressive shift in the frequency that excites them best. But at the frequencies represented in the Doppler-shifted echo, both the amount of basilar membrane and the density of inner hair cells along that region increase markedly. The result is a much greater acuity for those information-rich frequencies than for all other frequencies.The relationship between receptor and ganglion cell is seldom exclusive. Most commonly, a single ganglion cell receives input from several receptors and, in many cases, a single receptor sends information to two or more ganglion cells. Convergence and divergence go hand in hand for the somatosensory system as an individual receptor often is innervated by axons of several ganglion cells while the axon of a single ganglion cell can branch to end as part of several receptor organs. In the somatosensory system, however, the amount of divergence and convergence varies with the class of receptor involved and the location of the receptor on the body surface. Similar features are seen in the visual system, as divergence and convergence dominate different parts of the retina populated by different receptor types. In the cone-rich central retina, each cone provides as many as fi ve ganglion cells with their main visual drive, whereas in the rod-rich periphery, a few dozen rods supply each ganglion cell with its visual input. In its precision and in its implications for sensory processing, nothing approaches the divergence seen in the cochlea, where a single inner hair cell can be the source of all input received by at least 20 ganglion cells or as many as 35 ganglion cells. Thus, what emerges from a comparison across systems is that convergence and divergence from receptor to ganglion cell vary directly with the demands placed on the system at the specifi c location. When spatial resolution is a requirement, the convergence of receptor inputs onto individual ganglion cells is low. When detection of weak signals is necessary, convergence is high. When receptor input is used for a complex function or for multiple functions, divergence of input from a single receptor onto many ganglion cells occurs.For auditory, vestibular, somatosensory, and olfactory systems, the various classes of receptors and ganglion cells are part of the peripheral nervous system, generated as progeny of neuroblasts located in neural crests and sensory placodes. That is not the case for photoreceptors and retinal ganglion cells. The retina is generated as a protrusion of the embryonic diencephalon and thus all its neurons and supporting cells are CNS derivatives of neural tube origin. As a result of their origin, receptors and ganglion cells of the auditory, vestibular, and somatosensory systems and the ORNs of the nasal epithelium are supported by classes of nonneuronal cells that include modifi ed epithelial supporting cells and Schwann cells. Photoreceptors and retinal ganglion cells, by contrast, are supported by CNS neuroglial cells. Most dramatic of all the consequences resulting from this difference in origin is the ability of axons in somatosensory peripheral nerves to regenerate and reinnervate targets after they are damaged, as opposed to the complete and permanent loss of visual function when optic nerves are cut or crushed.For all systems except the olfactory, the receptor neurons you were born with are the ones you will live it. Nothing new is added. ORNs, however, have short lives, as they die off and are replaced every six weeks or so. What is seen for all systems, however, is the progressive decline in the number of receptors and in sensory acuity with normal aging. Somatosensory mechanoreceptors in humans are reduced by more than half from the age of 25 years to 65 years. Degeneration of photoreceptors is common as is a progressive reduction in hair cells of both the cochlea and the vestibular organs. Even the ORNs fail to keep up with the ravages of age, as the rate of generation does not match the rate of degeneration. The result in every case is a marked reduction in acuity that can lessen the hedonic value of foods and fl owering plants, render a person deaf or blind, and leave him unsteady while standing or walking.A long-appreciated principle that unites structure and function in a sensory system is the doctrine of specifi c energy, or the labeled line principle. This principle states that when a particular population of neurons is active, the conscious perception is of a specifi c stimulus Receptors in the retina and body surface are organized as two-dimensional sheets, and those of the cochlea form a one-dimensional line along the basilar membrane. Receptors in these organs communicate with ganglion cells and those ganglion cells with central neurons in a strictly ordered fashion, such that relationships with neighbors are maintained throughout. This type of pattern, in which neurons positioned side by side in one region communicate with neurons so positioned in the next region, is called a topographic pattern. As an example, the two touch-sensitive neurons in A great deal of research has been aimed at determining the codes by which neurons signal the presence and the intensity of a stimulus. In addition to place codes, neurons can signal information in the rate at which they respond and in the temporal pattern of their response. For a given receptor, the fi ring rate or frequency of action potentials signals the strength of the sensory input. The perceived intensity arises from an interaction between this fi ring rate and the number of neurons activated by a stimulus. Together the number of neurons active with any sensory stimulus and the level of their activity gives rise to an intensity code. This is the kind of code used by retinal ganglion cells to signal the intensity of light and by spiral ganglion cells to signal the intensity of sound. Temporal codes are also used in some systems. For instance, the phase-locking ability of auditory neurons extends to sound frequencies up to several thousand cycles per second, and this code is used for the perception of the pitch of sounds. In addition, all sensory systems must deal with the fact that stimuli can move, as with vibratory stimuli on the skin. This temporal information in a stimulus is carried by the time-varying pattern of activity in small groups of receptors and central neurons.A hallmark of all sensory systems is the ability of neurons at even the earliest stages of central processing to integrate the activity of more than one receptor. The most common and easily understood of these mechanisms is lateral inhibition Similar types of responses are evident in the somatosensory system, where the difference between center and surround is the location on the skin from which each is activated. In this case, skin mechanics produce receptive fi elds with a central hot spot of activity and a surrounding inactive zone. In the auditory system, lateral suppressive areas Axons of ganglion cells entering the CNS form the initial stage in a pathway through the thalamus to the cerebral cortex  In the somatosensory system, receptive fi elds display antagonistic centers and surrounds because of skin mechanics. In the retina and visual thalamus, a common type of receptive fi eld is antagonistic for location and for wavelength. Receptive fi eld 1 is excited by turning on red light at its center and is inhibited by turning on green light in its surround. Receptive fi eld 2 is less common and is antagonistic for wavelength without being antagonistic for the location of the stimuli. Both are generated by neural processing in the retina. In the auditory system, primary neurons are excited by single tones. The outline of this excitatory area is known as the tuning curve. When the neuron is excited by a tone in this area, the introduction of a second tone in fl anking areas usually diminishes the response. This "two-tone suppression" is also generated mechanically, as is seen in motion of the basilar membrane of the cochlea. All these centersurround organizations serve to sharpen responses over that which would be achieved by excitation alone. Information from all sensory systems except the olfactory are relayed through the thalamus on its way to the cerebral cortex Nuclei in the central pathways often contain multiple maps. For instance, in the auditory system, axons of spiral ganglion cells divide into branches as they enter the CNS and terminate in three subdivisions of the cochlear nucleus. Each division contains its own map of sound frequency that was originally established by the cochlea. The greatest number of maps generated from ganglion cell input is found in the visual system of primates, in which as many as six separate retinotopic maps are stacked on top of one another in the lateral geniculate nucleus, which receives direct input from the retina Axons of sensory relay nuclei of the thalamus project to a single area or a collection of neighboring areas of the cerebral cortex, thereby providing them with a precise topographic map of the sensory periphery. These parts of cortex are frequently referred to as primary sensory areas Each area of sensory cortex shares with its subcortical components a map of at least part of the sensory periphery. Thus, retinotopic, somatotopic, and tonotopic maps are evident in the relevant areas of cortex. The retina and skin are two-dimensional sheets so the map of the sensory periphery on the surface of the cortex is a simple transformation of the peripheral representation onto the cortex. In the auditory periphery, there is a one-dimensional mapping of frequency. This tonotopic mapping is represented faithfully along one dimension of cortical distance, and the orthogonal direction may map a second, as yet undiscovered, property.As previously indicated, the distribution of receptors is uneven for most systems. Thus, the fovea of the primate retina and the fi ngertips of the primate hand are regions that possess a high density of receptors with small receptive fi elds. Such an uneven distribution of neurons devoted to a structure is further amplifi ed in the CNS. A much greater percentage of neural machinery subserves the representation of the retinal fovea or the fi ngertips than deals with the representation of other regions of the retina or body surface It is now clear that mappings of sensory cortex are not fi xed and immutable but rather plastic. In the somatosensory system, if input from a restricted area of the body surface is removed by severing a nerve or by amputation of a digit, that portion of the cortex that was previously responsive to that region of the body surface becomes responsive to neighboring regions Neurons in areas of the sensory cortex are organized into six layers. The middle layers are the main site of termination of axons from the thalamus Properties other than place in the periphery are mapped in primary sensory areas of the cortex. The third spatial dimension of the cortex, that of depth, arranges neurons in adjacent 0.5-to 1-mm-wide regions, referred to as columns stimulus and the contrast between it and the surround, are also arranged in columns of primary visual cortex . Similar types of columns are evident in the somatosensory system, as regions of modality and place specifi city. They are most clearly seen in the representation of mystacial vibrissae in rodent somatosensory cortex, where a one-to-one matching of vibrissa with cortical territory gives rise to structures called barrels.In the auditory system, neurons within a column generally share the same best frequency and the same type of binaural interaction characteristic: either one ear excites the neurons and the other inhibits or suppresses the response to the fi rst ear or one ear excites and the other ear also excites or facilitates the response to the fi rst ear. Moreover, in areas of nonprimary cortex, the feature displayed most commonly by neurons of a particular area is one that often comes to occupy columns. A good example is found in the middle temporal area of visual association cortex, where neurons are tuned for the direction of a moving visual stimulus. Neurons selective for one particular direction of visual stimulus movement are organized into columns through the depth of MT these are fl anked by columns of neurons tuned for other directions of movement Neurons of the cerebral cortex send axons to subcortical regions throughout the neuraxis and to other areas of the cortex The overwhelming majority of cortical neurons project to other areas of cortex Responses of cortical neurons in primary sensory cortices are more complex than those seen for neurons in the periphery. One example is seen in the primary visual area of the cerebral cortex, where neurons are responsive to stimuli that are not concentric circles but elongated lines possessing a specifi c orientation. Comparable synthesis of simpler inputs to reconstruct more complex features of stimulus is apparent at higher levels in the visual system Physiologically, processing, and selectivity for stimulus features become progressively more complex within the hierarchically organized pathways that connect primary with association areas of the cortex The functional organization of sensory systems shares common themes of transduction, relay, organized mappings, parallel processing, and central modifi cation. It is no surprise that a case has been made for a common phylogenetic origin of sensory systems. Differences among the systems, however, demonstrate that each has existed and operated independently for as long as there have been vertebrates. What remains in overview is a well-ordered basic plan from periphery to perception that has been modifi ed in its details as variations in niche have led to specializations in function.Chemical Senses: Taste and OlfactionSome of the most remarkable feats in the animal kingdom are accomplished using chemical detection. For example, the male silkmoth can follow the scent of a female for several miles to reach its mate. A great white shark can detect one part blood in 1 million parts water, or one drop of blood in an Olympic-size swimming pool, and swims toward its injured prey from a quarter mile away. Strychnine, a plant alkaloid from the Strychnos nux vomic plant in Southern Asia and Australia, tastes bitter to humans in minute quantities, allowing us to detect and avoid consumption of toxic quantities that produce a convulsive violent death approximately 20 minutes after swallowing.The number of chemical compounds in our environment is vast, with more than 30 million compounds catalogued. Different combinations of these chemicals are emitted by foods, predators, and mates and act as signatures that animals use to distinguish among them. The chemical senses of olfaction and gustation allow for the detection of an enormous number of chemical cues and translate this information into meaningful behaviors. The identifi cation of large families of chemoreceptors, the ability to monitor cell activity in the periphery and central nervous system and the ability to genetically manipulate chemosensory systems in model organisms are rapidly revolutionizing our understanding of chemosensory systems and beginning to elucidate the brains mechanisms for encoding fl avors and fragrances.The sense of taste is involved primarily in feeding, allowing animals to identify food that is nutrient-rich and avoid toxic substances. Like the other primary senses, the best defi nition of the gustatory system is that it has specialized sensory cells in the periphery and unique regions in the brain dedicated to sensory processing. The sensory cues detected by the gustatory system are soluble chemicals, limiting detection to a short range by direct contact with a chemical source. The concentration range for taste detection is broad and depends on the nature of the chemical stimulus. At one extreme, taste cells detect sugars and amino acids at very high concentrations, allowing animals to detect only the most caloric foodstuffs instead of food with little nutritional value. At the other extreme, taste cells can also detect minute amounts of noxious substances or toxins, compounds that are harmful at very low concentrations. Mammals are thought to perceive only fi ve taste modalities: sweet, bitter, sour, salty and umami, with several chemicals in most categories.How the brain translates chemical detection into the perception of different taste modalities and taste behaviors is a basic problem in neural coding. Of course, the gustatory system does not work in isolation and the smell, texture, and sight of food also contributes to fl avor perception. For example, without our olfactory neurons, we are unable to recognize coffee, chocolate, or wine However, it is the gustatory system that acts as the fi nal checkpoint controlling food acceptance or rejection and is essential for the basic recognition of taste modalities. Understanding the neural coding of taste information begins with knowledge about how taste receptor cells detect chemical cues, an area of rapid advances. How taste quality is encoded in higher brain areas is an area of active investigation that will ultimately require unraveling neural circuits and neural activity underlying taste behavior.In mammals, taste recognition begins on the tongue, where specialized cells detect chemical cues. Mammalian taste cells are derived from epithelial tissue rather than neural tissue, although they display neural properties such as depolarization and release of neurotransmitters. The apical tip of each receptor cell contains microvilli that project into the mucus of the oral environment. The microvilli are the site of taste detection, where taste ligands interact with membranebound receptors or ion channels. The basolateral membrane of taste cells forms chemical synapses with primary gustatory nerve fi bers. The nerve fi bers enter the base of the taste bud and transmit taste detection to the brain.Groups of 50 to 100 taste cells are clustered together into onion-shaped organs called taste buds Taste buds are innervated by dendrites of neurons that travel in the facial, glossopharyngeal, or vagus nerves to gustatory nuclei in the brain stem. Different regions of the tongue are innervated by different nerves. Fungiform papillae and the foliate papillae on the anterior part of the tongue are innervated by the chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve. Taste buds on the soft palate receive fi bers from the greater superfi cial petrosal branch of the facial nerve. Circumvallate and foliate papillae on the posterior tongue contain taste buds innervated by the lingual-tonsillar branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve. Taste buds of the epiglottis and the esophagus are innervated by the internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve, which is a branch of the vagus nerve. A single nerve fi ber may innervate cells in more than one taste bud, and each taste bud is innervated by several different afferent fi bers.Taste receptor cells arise continually from an underlying population of basal epithelial cells. In rats, the life span of a taste cell in a fungiform papilla is approximately 10 days. Although the mechanisms of renewal are unknown, processes underlying taste cell survival are becoming clear. In particular, it is well established that the nerves that synapse with taste cells are required for taste cell survival. Severing the chordate tympani nerve that innervates fungiform papillae results in rapid degeneration of taste papillae and taste buds. Thus, gustatory nerves maintain a trophic infl uence over taste buds, which degenerate when their nerve supply is removed. Although taste nerves are required for survival, they do not instruct the differentiation of taste cells. The electrophysiological properties of taste cells are not altered when the nerves that innervate them are cross-wired. Together, these experiments demonstrate that synaptic connections are necessary for cell survival but not for taste cell development.Many interesting questions remain to be explored regarding taste cell turnover. For example, how is taste cell turnover regulated Are all taste cells renewed with equal probability or do representations of different taste cell populations change over time In other words, does a tongue maintain or change its tasteresponsiveness over time How does a dendrite know which taste cells to contact in the changing milieu of living and dying cells How is synapse formation and retraction controlled The renewal of taste cells may provide an ideal system to study tissue regeneration and stem cell differentiation as well as synapse plasticity.Recent fundamental discoveries have begun to identify the receptor molecules that detect taste ligands. There are two different families of G protein-coupled receptors that mediate the detection of sugars, amino acids and bitter compounds In mammals, a small family containing three genes mediates the detection of sugars and amino acids. This receptor family was identifi ed by isolation of genes expressed in taste tissue and by bioinformatics searches for related genes in the genome. The Taste Receptor 1 family is comprised of the T1R1, T1R2, and T1R3 receptors. These receptors are all G protein coupled receptors and contain large extracellular domains similar to the metabotropic glutamate receptors.What constitutes proof that a protein is a taste receptor First, the protein should be in the right place at the right time to do the job. Second, loss of the protein should lead to loss of taste detection. Third, addition of the protein into novel cells should cause these cells to respond to taste cues. These criteria have been fi rmly established for the T1R family of taste receptors and have demonstrated that the combination of T1R2 plus T1R3 detects sugars and the combination of T1R1 plus T1R3 recognizes amino acids.The following evidence demonstrates that the combination of T1R2 plus T1R3 recognizes sugars. First, as expected for taste receptors, the T1Rs are expressed in taste cells on the tongue. Second, mice engineered to lack either T1R2 or T1R3 do not detect sugars, as determined by electrophysiological recordings of taste nerves Mammals detect a wide array of sugars and amino acids only at high concentrations, allowing them to recognize compounds that provide nutritional value. The three T1R receptors apparently have solved the problem of detection by having loose ligandbinding sites that recognize several ligands with low affi nity. Differences in the binding sites of the T1R receptors are found in different species. For example, the taste of umami in humans is the taste of the amino acid glutamate. The human T1R1 plus T1R3 amino acid receptor binds to glutamate with a 10-fold higher affi nity than other amino acids. In contrast, the mouse T1R1 plus T1R3 receptor recognizes all amino acids with similar affi nity. Thus, mice have an amino acid taste whereas humans have an umami taste. Although this may sound like humans are short-changed, it may not be the case. Because foods that have one amino acid generally contain many, the enhanced ability to detect glutamate in humans may actually enhance detection of all amino acids. The observation that T1R sequence variation underlies differences in taste detection also occurs for sugars. For example, we fi nd aspartame sweet, but mice and rats do not detect it. Mice have been genetically engineered to express the human T1R2 and T1R3 in taste cells and these mice are now able to detect aspartame. Interestingly, cats lack a functional T1R2 receptor, providing a plausible explanation for why they do not taste sugars. These studies highlight the role of T1Rs in sugar and amino acid taste detection in mammals and demonstrate that sequence differences in T1Rs can account for species-specifi c taste preferences.Studies of the ligand-binding properties of the T1Rs argue that all T1Rs contribute to binding. Taking advantage of the observation that rat T1R2T1R3 and human T1R2T1R3 recognize some different sweeteners, experiments exchanging extracellular domains of the human and rodent T1R2T1R3 receptors were used to dissect receptor domains that recognize sweeteners. For example, as mentioned earlier, human T1R2T1R3 recognizes aspartame and rat T1R2T1R3 does not. Importantly, a rat receptor in which the extracellular domain of T1R2 has been replaced by the human T1R2 extracellular domain does detect aspartame. This argues that the extracellular domain of human T1R2 detects aspartame. A series of these domain-swapping studies demonstrated that the T1R2 extracellular amino-terminal domain binds several sugars, the T1R2 transmembrane carboxyl-terminal domain binds the G-protein and the T1R3 transmembrane carboxyl-terminal domain binds some artifi cial sweeteners. Thus, different regions of T1Rs mediate taste detection and both T1R2 and T1R3 participate in ligand recognition. This strongly argues that T1R2 and T1R3 are coreceptors for sugars.A common variation in human behavior is the ability to detect the bitter compound phenylthiocarbamide. In 1931, a scientist at the Dupont chemical company synthesized this compound and quicklyPkd2l1-DTA FIGURE 24.4 Mice lacking specifi c taste receptors have specifi c taste defects. Shown are nerve recordings showing taste-induced activity to amino acids, sugars, bitter compounds, sour compounds, and salts. Wild-type mice respond to all compounds. Mice lacking T1R1 do not detect amino acids, mice lacking T1R2 do not detect sugars, and mice lacking T2R5 do not detect specifi c bitter compounds. From The Taste Receptor 2 family of bitter receptors is a family of G protein-coupled receptors whose members, unlike T1Rs, contain a small extracellular domain and most resemble the opsin family of GPCRs. There are 25 functional T2R receptors in human, 35 in mouse and rat, and only three in chicken. Most T2R genes are linked in large chromosomal arrays, suggesting rapid expansion of this gene family.A number of lines of evidence conclusively demonstrate the T2Rs are bitter receptors. First, T2Rs are specifi cally expressed in taste cells on the tongue. Second, the receptors are localized to taste cell dendrites decorating the taste pore, the site of taste detection. Third, heterologous cells expressing T2Rs respond to bitter compounds for example, cells expressing mT2R5 respond specifi cally to cyclohexamide, whereas cells containing mT2R8 respond strongly to denatonium and weakly to PROP. Fourth, mice lacking specifi c T2Rs show specifi c bitter taste defects Studies of the T2R receptor family provide important insights into how animals recognize a large number of bitter compounds and are able to detect them at very low concentrations. Each T2R receptor generally recognizes only a few bitter compounds with very high affi nity, allowing for very specifi c detection. In addition, the large number of T2R receptors ensures that animals can recognize several bitter compounds.Activation of the T1R and T2R receptors ultimately leads to cell depolarization and neurotransmitter release. In general, signal transduction mediated by G-protein coupled receptors involves a conformational change in the receptor leading to activation of a heterotrimeric G protein, in turn activating enzymes whose byproducts regulate the activity of ion channels. Many signal transduction cascades have been proposed to mediate sweet and bitter taste detection. However, key experiments pinpoint a few critical transducers for sweet and bitter signaling Gustducin is the Ga subunit of a heterotrimeric protein that participates in taste transduction. Gustducin is found in taste cells on the tongue that containThe ability to taste the compound phenylthiocarbamide varies drastically among humans. Approximately 75% of people fi nd PTC intensely bitter whereas 25% do not detect it. The ability to detect PTC was linked to a small region of chromosome 7 in human genetic studies. The taste receptor gene T2R38 is located within this interval and variations in its sequence perfectly correlate with the ability to taste PTC. In the human population, there are two major sequence variations in T2R38, which differ by three amino acids. One variant accounts for the nontasters and the other variant is the major taster allele Kristin Scott BOX 24.1IV. SENSORY SYSTEMS T1R and T2R receptors. Confusingly, it is not found in all T1R-containing cells, suggesting that either a subset of T1R-containing cells is nonfunctional or other Ga subunits contribute to taste transduction. Animals lacking gustducin show behavioral and electrophysiological defects in the detection of bitter and sugar compounds, arguing that this Ga participates in taste transduction. Downstream of G protein activation, the enzyme phospholipase C-b2 and the ion channel TRPM5 mediate taste transduction. PLC-b2 and TRPM5 are coexpressed in all T1R and T2R-containing cells. Transgenic mice that lack the PLC-b2 enzyme do not taste sugar or bitter compounds. Similarly, loss of the ion channel TRPM5 results in mice that do not taste sugars or bitter compounds. The simplest model for taste transduction is that activation of T1Rs or T2Rs leads to activation of gustducin, leading to activation of PLCb2 and depolarization by TRPM5. PLC-b2 catalyzes the breakdown of phosphoinositol 1,4 bisphosphonate into inositol-1,4,5,-triphosphate and diacylglycerol. IP 3 can release calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum. Whether IP 3 , DAG, calcium, or another second messenger activates TRPM5 is unknown. Indeed, it has not been formally demonstrated that activation of PLC-2 directly activates TRPM5 or that these signaling molecules are in a linear pathway. Nevertheless, the most parsimonious explanation is that gustducin, PLC-2, and TRPM5 are signaling molecules that form the taste transduction cascade.Unlike sweet and bitter taste detection, which relies on activation of G-protein coupled receptors and downstream signaling molecules to regulate channel activity, the tastes of sour and salty are likely to be directly mediated by ion channels. Sour taste is produced by acids, and the degree of sourness depends primarily on proton concentration. Patch-clamp studies suggest that several different ion channels may participate in sour transduction, which is not surprising because protons are capable of modulating most ion channels. A recent study has identifi ed a candidate sour receptor, comprised of PKD1L3 and PKD2L1, that is expressed in taste cell subsets necessary for sour detection.PKD1L3 and PKD2L1 are cationic ion channels of the TRP family of ion channels. TRP channels are necessary signaling molecules in Drosophila phototransduction, mammalian pheromone detection, C. elegans chemosensation, as well as thermosensation and hearing. They can be directly activated by ligands or downstream transducers of signaling. PKD1L3 and PKD2L1 are coexpressed in taste cells on the tongue that do not contain T1Rs or T2Rs. These channels are localized to the taste pore, the site of ligand binding. In heterologous cells, they act together to detect sour compounds such as citric acid, hydrochloric acid, and malic acid. Mice lacking these channels have not yet been generated. However, transgenic mice have been produced such that the PKD2L1 promoter drives expression of a toxin gene to kill all cells that express the channel. Mice lacking these cells do not show electrophysiological responses to sour compounds, but still respond to sugars, salts, and bitter compounds. These experiments argue that cells containing PKD2L1 are necessary for sour detection and suggest that PKD2L1 and PKD1L3 are the mammalian sour detectors.Molecules that mediate salt taste are not clearly defi ned. The best candidate ion channel that may mediate sodium salt taste is the epithelial sodium channel ENaC. This channel, which is responsible for sodium transport in a variety of epithelial tissues, is expressed on the apical membrane of salt-sensitive taste cells, where it mediates the passive infl ux of sodium. Sodium simply diffuses through the open channels to depolarize taste cells, and is presumably pumped out by a NaK-ATPase on the basolateral membrane. The fi rst evidence for a role of ENaC in taste came from experiments showing that the gustatory nerve response to NaCl was inhibited by amiloride, a diuretic drug known to block these channels in other transporting epithelial tissues. More recently, patch-clamp recordings have directly demonstrated the presence of amiloride-sensitive sodium channels in taste cell membranes. However, the taste cells that express ENaC channels have not been defi ned, animals lacking ENaCs in taste cells have not been generated to determine their function, and ENaCs have not been misexpressed in bitter or sugar cells and shown to confer salt detection to these cells. Thus, although ENaCs do depolarize in response to salts and are expressed in taste cells, it has not yet been determined whether they are necessary and suffi cient for salt taste detection.Taste receptors are segregated into different taste cells on the tongue. In situ hybridization experiments as well as immunohistochemistry have been used to determine the expression patterns of receptor mRNAs and proteins. These experiments demonstrated that T1Rs and T2Rs are not found in the same taste cells Most taste receptors are expressed in subsets of taste buds on the tongue and on the palate. T1R1 plus T1R3 are coexpressed in fungiform papillae and palate T1R2 and T1R3 are coexpressed in the circumvallate, foliate, and palate papillae. T2Rs are expressed on the circumvallate, foliate, and palate papillae and PKD2L1 on the circumvallate, foliate, fungiform, and palate papillae. This argues that different parts of the tongue are not dedicated to detecting a single taste modality. Although many textbooks include a tongue "taste map" suggesting that the front of the tongue detects sugars, the side salt and sour, and the back bitter, this is not true. Instead, the topographic distribution of taste receptors on the tongue suggests there are more subtle differences in the relative sensitivities of different tongue regions.The fi nding that different taste compounds activate different populations of taste cells suggests that activation of different cells in the periphery leads to different taste percepts and different taste behaviors. To test this, transgenic mice were engineered to express novel receptors in taste cells. In one derivation of this experiment, mice were engineered to contain a modifi ed G protein coupled receptor activated solely by a synthetic ligand in all T1R2 containing taste cells. This exogenous receptor is activated only by a compound called spiradoline, which animals do not detect. These mice then were given a choice between drinking water or water with the synthetic ligand, spiradoline. The mice with the RASSL in T1R2 cells showed a strong preference for spiradoline, in contrast to normal mice. In another experiment, the RASSL was put in T2R taste cells these mice now avoid spiradoline. In a third extremely elegant experiment, transgenic mice were engineered to contain the human bitter receptor for phenyl--d-glucopyranoside in either T2R or T1R2 cells The three nerves that contact taste cells have cell bodies in ganglia and send axons to the solitary tract nucleus of the medulla in a topographic order Drosophila melanogaster, like mammals, recognize sugars, salts, and bitter compounds, making them a model system for comparative studies of taste recognition. Drosophila taste with sensory neurons on their proboscis, legs, and wings. A family of 68 candidate Gustatory Receptor genes, unrelated to mammalian T1R or T2R receptors, may mediate taste detection as some members are expressed in taste tissue and recognize taste ligands in heterologous systems. Similar to mammalian taste, multiple receptors are expressed in each Drosophila taste cell. Two different classes of taste cells have been identifi ed based on the receptor subsets they contain. One population detects bitter compounds and a second population detects sugars. Additional subpopulations of taste neurons likely recognize other taste categories. Thus, although fl ies and mammals are separated by more than 500 million years of evolution, they both have taste cells that selectively recognize bitter compounds or sugars. This suggests that modality-specifi c taste cells may be a general strategy that organisms use to distinguish nutrients from toxins.This segregation continues throughout the gustatory pathway to the cortex, where there are separate terminal fi elds for VIIth and IXth nerve inputs. From the NST, ascending fi bers project in most species to third-order cells within the parabrachial nuclei of the pons. A thalamocortical projection arises from the PbN to carry taste information to the parvicellular portion of the ventroposteromedial nucleus of the thalamus and on to the gustatory neocortex, located in rodents within the agranular insular cortex. In primates, taste fi bers bypass the pontine relay and project directly to the VPMpc.Arising in parallel with the thalamocortical projection is a second projection that carries gustatory afferent information into limbic forebrain areas involved in feeding and autonomic regulation, including the lateral hypothalamus, the central nucleus of the amygdala, and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Descending axons within the gustatory system arise from the insular cortex and several ventral forebrain areas and project to the PbN and NST. There are also numerous local connections among neurons within the NST and with cells of the oral, facial, and pharyngeal motor nuclei, either directly or via interneurons in the reticular formation. These hindbrain systems form the substrate for many taste-mediated somatic and visceral responses related to ingestion and rejection of tastants.Three features of taste ligands are thought to be encoded by the activation of gustatory neurons: intensity, quality, and hedonic value. Intensity refers to the perceived strength of the stimulus for example, low concentrations of sugar taste less sweet than high concentrations. Quality refers to the nature of the sensory stimulus mammals are thought to perceive fi ve different taste qualities-sweet, bitter, sour, salty, and amino acids. Hedonic value is the perceived pleasantness or unpleasantness of a taste ligand. Thus, gustatory afferent input provides at least three types of information that are interrelated in complex ways. How taste intensity, quality, and hedonic value are represented in the nervous system is the problem of gustatory neural coding.Gustatory stimulus intensity, the magnitude of the evoked sensation, generally is assumed to be encoded by neural impulse frequency and numbers of responding neurons. All neurons responsive to taste stimuli show some modulation by stimulus concentration, with increased fi ring rates as concentration increases. In addition, at high taste ligand concentrations, more cells are responsive than at low concentrations. These studies suggest that a simple rate code, and cell recruitment at high concentrations, allow the discrimination of different concentrations of a taste stimulus. The encoding of taste quality and hedonic value are more complicated. Taste quality and hedonic value are strongly related. Most animals fi nd sugars pleasanttasting and bitter compounds unpleasant. However, species-specifi c predispositions toward the hedonic value of a stimulus can be overcome in response to metabolic or pharmacologic manipulations. Thus, the hedonic value of taste qualities can be infl uenced by experience and physiologic state. Unlike gustatory intensity and quality, the issue of hedonic coding has not been addressed systematically in neurobiological studies of the taste system, probably because hedonic value is not independent of either quality or intensity and can be modifi ed by both experience and physiologic state.Mechanisms underlying taste quality encoding are controversial. Different models are described next.The nature of the neural coding of taste quality has been debated vigorously for many years, with considerable disagreement about whether taste quality is represented by activity in specifi c neural channels or by the relative activity across the responsive neurons The labeled line model of taste coding proposes that different taste qualities are encoded by the activation of different cells. In this model, cells respond to selective cues in the periphery and this information remains segregated in the brain. This hypothesis suggests that "sweetness" is coded by activity of neurons that respond selectively to sugars, "saltiness" by activity of neurons that respond selectively to salt, and so forth. Activity in a given cell type provides complete information about the quality of the stimulus. In this scheme, the animal then discerns different tastes by the activation of different neurons.In this model of taste coding, each cell responds to multiple taste modalities with different activity levels for different taste ligands, such that taste quality is coded by the pattern of activity across taste fi bers. In this coding hypothesis, the pattern of activity generated across the entire array of taste neurons encodes taste quality, whereas activity in any one cell cannot unambiguously represent both stimulus quality and intensity. This population approach to quality coding makes the multiple sensitivity of gustatory neurons an essential part of the neural code for taste quality it stresses that the code for quality is given in the response of the entire population of cells, placing little or no emphasis on the role of an individual neuron. In this scenario, the animal then discerns different tastes by differences in the ensemble activity of taste neurons.The studies of taste receptor genes strongly argue for the labeled line encoding of taste information in the periphery. Different taste cells contain different taste receptor genes and respond to different taste ligands. T1R2 plus T1R3 cells detect sugars, T1R1 plus T1R3 cells detect amino acids, T2R cells detect bitter compounds, and PKD2L1 cells detect acids. There is no overlap in the expression of different receptor-types and thus no cell that detects both sugar and bitter compounds. Thus, "sweetness" is encoded by the activation of sugar cells "bitter" by the activation of bittersensing cells.Not only do different cells identify different tastes, but these different cell-types are necessary and sufficient for taste detection and behavior. Mice lacking T1R2 do not detect sugars, but still detect bitter, salts, sour, and amino acids. Similarly, mice lacking cells containing PKD2L1 do not detect sour, but do detect sugars, bitter, salt, and amino acids. Moreover, simply activating the sugar cells artifi cially generates taste acceptance behavior and activating the bitter cells generates avoidance behavior. These experiments are diffi cult to reconcile with population coding models. In population coding, the relative activity of nonselective neurons dictates taste quality and loss of any subpopulation of taste cells would affect detection of all compounds. In addition, in population coding, activation of a subset of taste cells would be meaningful only in the context of the ensemble activity. Instead, different taste cells recognize different taste modalities and mediate specifi c taste behaviors, arguing that there are labeled lines of taste information from peripheral activation to behavior.Although the selectivity of taste cells in the periphery strongly argues for labeled lines of taste information, neurophysiological recordings of both primary gustatory nerves and central gustatory neurons typically show that individual fi bers or cells respond to more than one of the stimuli representing the salty, sweet, sour, or bitter taste qualities, often to as many as three or four. Accumulating evidence suggests that there are functional classes of neurons that correspond in some way to primary taste qualities, for example, "sucrose-best" cells, "sodium-best" cells. However, analyses show that no single class of neurons in isolation can discriminate well between different taste qualities. As a result, an "across neuron pattern" theory suggesting that taste quality is coded by the relative activity across a population of neurons was proposed.The current debate in the mammalian taste fi eld is how to reconcile the evidence of labeled lines for different tastes in the periphery with the evidence for mixed lines in the central nervous system. One possibility is that a single nerve fi ber synapses onto taste cells of many different taste qualities on the tongue, such that the labeled lines in the periphery become mixed at the fi rst synapse. Alternatively, electrophysiological studies of single neurons with defi ned connections to taste cells, rather than random recordings of neurons in the solitary tract nucleus or gustatory cortex, may reveal populations of higher-order taste neurons that show selective responses to single taste qualities, supporting labeled line encoding.The sense of taste allows animals to recognize different chemical compounds and gives rise to a limited number of taste sensations. Two families of taste receptors, the T1R and T2R families, mediate the detections of sugars, amino acids, and bitter compounds. These receptors are G proteincoupled receptors that activate a heterotrimeric G protein, phospholipase C, and TRPM5, leading to cell depolarization and neurotransmitter release. Candidate ion channels have been implicated in the detections of salts and sour compounds. Compared to mammalian olfaction, the gustatory system utilizes a relatively small number of receptors with very diverse structures to detect chemical compounds.The transduction mechanisms for taste stimuli are located on receptor cells within taste buds distributed in several subpopulations, innervated by different peripheral nerves. These nerves project into the nucleus of the solitary tract in the medulla. From there, projections arise to the parabrachial nuclei in the pons and then to the thalamus and gustatory neocortex. A parallel pathway carries taste information into the ventral forebrain to areas involved in autonomic regulation. The gustatory system extracts information about taste intensity, quality and the hedonic value of the stimuli. How gustatory information is encoded in the brain is an area of active investigation. In the periphery, an individual taste cell is tuned to a single taste quality, arguing that there are labeled lines of taste information. More centrally, gustatory neurons appear broadly tuned to stimuli of different taste qualities, leading to a debate whether the labeled lines in the periphery become mixed centrally. The ability to determine the connectivity of higher order taste neurons and their taste response profi les will enhance our understanding of taste neural circuits and the coding mechanisms underlying taste perception.The number of volatile cues in the environment that animals can detect is colossal. Humans, although not known to have particularly keen noses, can sense over 10,000 different odors, with detection thresholds in the parts per million and even parts per billion. Scent-tracking dogs, especially bloodhounds, have even more sensitive noses, approximately 10 million times more sensitive than humans, allowing them to follow scent trails a few days old. The ability to detect chemicals a distance from the source allows animals to direct their movement toward food and potential mates and away from harmful or dangerous environments. Although many animals rely on their olfactory system for survival, the sense of smell in humans is primarily an aesthetic sense, enhancing our enjoyment of foods and evoking memories of past experiences.How does the olfactory system allow for the recognition and discrimination of thousands of different odors A large family of 1000 olfactory receptors provides the molecular diversity necessary for recogniz-ing numerous ligands. The discovery of the olfactory receptor genes has provided molecular tools to probe the molecular underpinnings of olfactory detection. The logic of olfactory detection in the periphery is discussed next.Odor signals are low molecular weight molecules that fall into several broad classes. In terrestrial animals, the molecules tend to be small An important category consists of molecules used in reproductive activities, including signals used in attracting mates, identifying them, copulating, blocking pregnancy, facilitating nipple attachment by infants, and infant identifi cation. Some of these activities are mediated by complex mixtures of acids, esters, Nonadiene -2, 6 -al FIGURE 24.10 Odor molecules given off by the jasmine fl ower that constitute the smell of jasmine as an odor object OLFACTION and other types of common molecules others by individual larger and more complex molecules such as musks and still others by specifi c types of molecules for conspecifi c signaling known as pheromones.Most vertebrate animals sense odor molecules by means of olfactory receptor neurons located in a pseudostratifi ed epithelium within the nasal cavity. These are bipolar neurons a thin dendrite arises from one pole, ending in a knob with 6 to 12 cilia The cilia greatly increase the surface area containing the olfactory receptors. The cilia form a dense mat within the mucus layer that provides an effective device for capturing odor molecules that are absorbed from the air into the mucus. The mucus is viscous except for a watery surface layer. From the other pole of the neuron, a thin unmyelinated axon arises and joins other axons in the submucosa to form bundles that connect to the olfactory bulb.The 2004 Nobel Prize in Medicine was awarded to Dr. Richard Axel and Dr. Linda Buck for their seminal discovery of a large family of mammalian olfactory receptors. Their search for olfactory receptors was based on three assumptions: fi rst, that olfactory receptors would be G protein-coupled receptors The nemode worm Caenorhabditis elegans lives in the soil, lacks a visual system, and relies largely on chemical detection to survive in the environment. This small animal has only 302 neurons, but displays complex olfactory behaviors, making it a model system to study chemosensory processing. Thirty-two sensory neurons mediate chemical detection and contain members of a large chemoreceptor gene family. These receptors are G proteincoupled receptors, but are not related to mammalian olfactory receptors. There are approximately 1500 chemoreceptor genes in C. elegans, comprising 7% of all its genes. Thus, of all animals whose genomes have been sequenced, C. elegans dedicates the most genes, and the highest fraction of its genes, to chemical sensing.Many receptors are found in the same chemosensory cell, as might be expected given the large number of receptors and the small number of sensory cells. This organization differs from the olfactory systems of mammals and fl ies, but resemble mammalian and fl y gustatory systems. Parceling many receptors into a single cell allows these animals to detect many chemical compounds despite the limited number of chemosensory neurons.C. elegans shows sophisticated behavioral responses to chemical cues, including attraction and avoidance of different volatiles cues, adaptation to specifi c odors as well as learned associations. For example, worms can learn to avoid pathogenic bacteria based on its smell after one exposure to the bacteria. This is similar to conditioned taste aversion in mammals where one encounter with a nausea-producing food leads to aversion of the smell and taste of the food.  There are approximately 1300 olfactory genes in mouse, 500 in humans, and 100 in zebrafi sh and catfi sh. They are members of the class A family of GPCRs, which includes opsin and -adrenergic receptors. These receptors contain a short extracellular amino terminus, seven membrane spanning domains, and an intracellular carboxyl terminus. Hypervariable regions in TM 3, 4, and 5 likely form the ligand-binding pockets, based on the ligand binding domains of other GPCRs such as the -adrenergic receptor. Individual human olfactory receptor genes share between approximately 50 and 95% sequence identity. Large gene families comprising olfactory receptors also have been identifi ed in nematodes, fi sh, and insects.Olfactory receptor genes are organized in the genome in large linked arrays on several chromosomes. The size of the arrays ranges from 6 to 138 in humans and up to 15 in C. elegans. The Drosophila genome, with fewer olfactory receptors, contains small arrays of two to three genes as well as many singly distributed genes. The large arrays in mammals and nematodes suggest that odor receptor gene families are evolving rapidly by duplication and expansion.The identifi cation of odor receptors provided fundamental insight into the molecular basis of odor perception. The large number of receptors dedicated to binding odor molecules provides an elegant solution to the problem of how animals detect a large number of smells. In addition, identifying receptors opened the door to examine interactions of different receptors with different odors, the organization of olfactory receptors in olfactory neurons, and the representations of olfactory receptors in the olfactory bulb.The large number of ORs and the large number of odor molecules, as well as technical diffi culties in expressing ORs in heterologous cells, has limited the ability to determine the ligands that different ORs recognize. In the fi rst demonstration that ORs detect volatile cues, the "I7" odor receptor was overexpressed in most olfactory neurons of the rat. The electro-olfactogram response of the epithelium to a battery of odors was examined. Among some 80 compounds tested, only longer chain aldehydes gave increased responses over controls, with octyl aldehyde giving the peak response, and lesser responses for fl anking long-chain aldehydes. This experiment demonstrated that a single OR detects a small subset of odors.More recently, advances in the ability to express receptors in heterologous cells has resulted in the identifi cation of receptor-ligand pairs for approximately 20 different ORs. Some ORs bind very few ligands whereas others are broadly tuned. These receptor-ligand studies have shown that one OR will bind more than one odor and one odor will activate more than one OR. These experiments provide direct evidence that members of the large gene family of GPCR receptors are specifi cally sensitive to odors.Studies of olfactory receptor expression in mammals revealed that each olfactory neuron contains only one member of the OR gene family. OR gene expression was determined by in situ hybridization experiments, showing that each OR is found in approximately 0.1% of olfactory neurons. In addition, isolating OR receptor sequences from single olfactory neurons demonstrated that each neuron expresses mRNA for only one OR.Finally, several pairs of ORs were examined to determine if two receptors were found in the same cell, but none of the ORs examined were coexpressed. Instead, receptors label nonoverlapping cell populations.Not only is one receptor expressed per cell, but only one allele of a receptor is expressed per cell. All diploid organisms contain paired homologous chromosomes and two copies of each gene, the maternal allele and the paternal allele. For most genes, a cell that expresses the maternal allele also expresses the paternal allele. However, olfactory receptor genes show allelic exclusion. One demonstration of this came from engineering two sets of mice: one transgenic mouse contained the olfactory "P2" receptor linked to a green fl uorescent protein and the other transgenic mouse contained the "P2" receptor linked to a second protein visualized with red fl uorescence. Offspring of these mice contained one allele of P2 green and one allele of P2 red. These mice had red olfactory neurons and green olfactory neurons, but no neurons that were both red and green. This experiment directly showed that only one allele of an olfactory receptor is expressed per cell. The consequence of allelic exclusion is that each olfactory neuron contains only genetically identical receptors. One could imagine that small changes in the nucleotide sequence of an allele might alter its ligand-binding properties, such that the maternal and paternal alleles recognize different odors. Segregating these alleles into different cells might expand the The distinction between taste and smell may seem blurry in the fi sh. All chemicals that fi sh encounter are water-soluble, eliminating the distinction between volatile odors and soluble taste cues. Nevertheless, fi sh have distinct senses for taste and smell. Chemicals that aquatic animals detect include various amino acids that are important for food recognition as well as bile salts that may function as alarm signals to warn of the presence of predators.Similar to mammals, the sensory organs for taste and smell are separate in the fi sh. Olfactory neurons are found in structures called olfactory rosettes in facial pits. Openings called nares lead to the external environment for smell detection. Taste cells are found on lips, gill rakers, pharynx, oral cavity, and distributed on the body surface.Fish also contain receptors that are similar to mammalian olfactory and gustatory receptors. Zebrafi sh contain approximately 143 genes with sequence similarity to mammalian olfactory receptors, type A receptors with short amino-termini. This is about 10-fold fewer receptors than in mice. In addition, zebrafi sh have 54 type C receptors, similar to mammalian V2R pheromone receptors. These are expressed in olfactory neurons, and one receptor has been shown to detect an amino acid in heterologous expression systems. There are 4 T1R genes in the zebrafi sh expressed in gustatory neurons. In addition, only 2 T2R-like genes have been identifi ed in the zebrafi sh genome.The molecular similarity of taste receptors and olfactory receptors from fi sh to man, and the anatomical segregation into different sensory structures, argues that taste and smell are different senses for fi sh.repertoire of odors that different olfactory neurons detect.The general rule that each olfactory neuron expresses only one olfactory receptor gene has important implications for olfactory coding in the periphery. The organization allows the activation of different olfactory receptors to be equivalent to the activity of different cells. Thus, the brain can know which odors are present by which neurons are activated.How is the choice of olfactory receptor controlled to ensure that one and only one receptor is expressed per cell Although the determinants of receptor choice are not yet clear, a feedback mechanism has been uncovered that ensures that once one odorant receptor is expressed in an olfactory neuron, no other receptors are expressed. Simply put, the expression of a functional OR turns off the expression of all other ORs. The main experimental support for this is the observation that neurons expressing a receptor that does not function turn on the expression of a second receptor. In contrast, olfactory neurons expressing a functional receptor do not express other receptors. This argues that expression of a functional odorant receptor elicits a feedback signal that eliminates expression of other receptors. A combination of molecular biology and biochemistry has uncovered the olfactory signal transduction cascade There are 35 odor-binding proteins in the fruit fl y Drosophila melanogaster. Each OBP is expressed in a spatially restricted region of the olfactory epithelium, suggesting that different OBPs serve different functions. One of the best studied odorant binding proteins is a Drosophila OBP called lush. Fly mutants lacking lush do not detect the compound 11-cis-vaccenyl acetate. cVA acts as a pheromone in Drosophila mediating aggregation and aspects of courtship behavior. Olfactory neurons of lush mutants do not respond to cVA, demonstrating the lush is essential for detection of this pheromone. Remarkably, application of lush protein to the mutant olfactory neurons rescues the ability of these neurons to respond to cVA. This experiment demonstrates that lush is necessary for olfactory neurons to detect cVA. It argues that lush is involved in presenting the odor to the odor receptor and is not involved in clearance of the odor away from the receptor. For more information, please refer to OLFACTION to cell depolarization, the generation of action potentials, and neurotransmitter release.Mice lacking the G olf , the AC3, and the CNG channel have been generated and the phenotypes of these mutants highlight the critical roles of olfactory signaling. Mice lacking G olf , AC3, or CNG channel generally die within one to two days of birth without milk in their stomach, unable to nurse. This reduced survival rate is consistent with the idea that olfactory cues are necessary for newborn pups to suckle. The activity of olfactory neurons in these mutant mice was monitored by extracellular recording from the nasal epithelium in response to a panel of odors. Olfactory neurons from the AC3 mutants and the CNG channel mutants do not respond to odors. Olfactory neurons from mice lacking G olf show signifi cantly reduced odor responses, suggesting that a second Ga subunit found in olfactory neurons, G s , may mediate the residual odor response in the G olf mutants. These studies demonstrate that the G olf , the AC3, and the CNG channel are essential components of the olfactory signal transduction cascade.The olfactory CNG channel is structurally related to the mammalian photoreceptor transduction channel. Similar to the photoreceptor channel, the olfactory FIGURE 24.12 Sensory transduction of odor molecules involves a cyclic AMP second messenger pathway. Odor molecules initially are absorbed into the olfactory mucus, where they may bind to olfactory-binding protein, which carries them to the olfactory cilia. Activation of a receptor by odor molecules activates a GTP-binding protein an adenylate cyclase, which produces cyclic AMP and a cationic cyclic nucleotide-gated channel. Steps 1-3 generate the initial sensory response. Olfactory adaptation occurs in several steps.Step 4: Calcium activates a chloride conductance, which amplifi es the sensory response.Step 5: Ca 2 activates a calcium binding protein, which produces immediate adaptation from the initial dynamic response peak.Step 6: Ca 2 activates a calciumcalmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, which produces short-term adaptation.Step 7: Ca 2 activates a cyclic GMP second messenger pathway that activates CO, which acts on the CNG channel to produce long-term adaptation.Step 8: A CaNa exchanger restores ion balance. Abbreviations, see text. Based on Menini Zufall and Leinders-Zufall The combined sensory current causes a depolarization that spreads through the dendrite to the cell body and axon hillock, activating voltage-gated channels that generate action potentials. In this way, the amplitude and time course of the graded sensory potentials generated by odor stimuli are transduced into a frequency code of impulses that propagate through the axon to its terminals in the olfactory bulb.The decline of a sensory response during sustained stimulation is referred to as adaptation. In olfactory sensory neurons, adaptation proceeds in several stages. Experimental studies have quickly identifi ed calcium as a key player. The fi rst stage The second stage of adaptation is called short-term adaptation. This occurs in response to cAMP alone and suggests a feedback pathway from calcium involving calciumcalmodulin-dependent protein kinase II acting on adenylate cyclase Calcium ions also act externally to reduce the conductance of the channel. In the absence of calcium, the channel has a unitary conductance of some 45 pS in normal concentrations of extracellular calcium, calcium entering the channel induces a "fl icker block," reducing the conductance to less than 1 pS. This block is removed by depolarizing the membrane, suggesting that in normal calcium concentrations, olfactory sensory neurons act as coincidence detectors for cyclic nucleotide production plus membrane depolarization. In normal calcium and at normal resting potential, most of the channels appear to be in the blocked state. This mechanism may enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of the sensory response.The olfactory epithelium of mammals is distributed over the medial septal wall and the lateral turbinates toward the back of the nasal cavity. Each olfactory neuron expresses one of a thousand olfactory receptors. Neurons that express the same receptor are not tightly clustered together in the epithelium nor are they stochastically distributed throughout the epithelium. Instead, the ORNs that express a given receptor gene are located within one of roughly four zones that run anterior to posterior in the epithelium. Within a zone, the organization of ORNs with the same receptor appears random. The pattern of receptor expression suggests that there is positional information in the nasal epithelium that limits receptor expression to only one of four broad zones, with receptors randomly selected within a zone. How receptor expression is determined is an area of active investigation.Olfactory neurons in the nasal epithelium send axons directly to the mammalian brain, to paired structures in the most rostral region called the olfactory bulbs Axons of olfactory neurons terminate in the rounded regions of neuropil termed glomeruli. Anatomical studies from the time of Ramon y Cajal have shown that the glomerulus is an anatomical unit for the convergence of axons from many ORNs. In rats, the 15 million olfactory neurons converge onto 1500 glomeruli, giving an average overall convergence of some 10,000 : 1. In situ hybridization and gene-targeting methods showed that ORNs expressing the same odorant receptor protein converge onto one or a few glomeruli in the olfactory bulb The functional signifi cance of glomeruli is seen when an animal is exposed to an odor and the activity patterns in the olfactory bulb are observed. The key observation is that different odors evoke different patterns of active glomeruli located in distinct domains within the olfactory bulb. Thus, the focal glomerular activity elicited by the odor of amyl acetate is localized in two broad zones, one medial and one lateral, within the olfactory bulb glomerular sheet These maps were obtained with the original 2-deoxyglucose mapping method, which has been confi rmed and extended by other techniques A different methodological approach has been to focus on the time course of the electrophysiological responses of olfactory cells. These studies Neurons with the same olfactory receptor are scattered in the sensory epithelium, yet all target to only one of a thousand possible glomeruli in the olfactory bulb. Axon targeting of olfactory neurons is a very complicated wiring problem. One model for targeting is that concentration gradients of axon guidance receptors in the nasal epithelium and gradients of guidance cues in the olfactory bulb direct targeting. This approach is used in the formation of the topographic map of retinal projections in the visual system, where neurons that occupy nearby positions in the periphery synapse at nearby locations. Varying the concentration of a guidance cue or guidance receptor along a sheet of tissue is unlikely to be suffi cient to direct targeting the olfactory system, as neurons containing the same receptor are found at very different positions yet project to the same glomerulus. An alternative model is that neurons with the same olfactory receptor express the same axon guidance receptor, and the matching of a thousand different guidance cues and a thousand different guidance receptors is used to direct each neuron to its appropriate glomerulus. This begs the question: how are the expression of an odorant receptor and a guidance receptor coordinately controlled An elegant solution that is emerging is that the olfactory receptors themselves may participate in axon guidance.A number of lines of evidence argue that the olfactory receptors participate in axon guidance. First, olfactory receptor protein is localized to the axon Odor stimulation gives rise to spatial patterns of activity in the glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb due to the differential activation of glomeruli.The glomerulus is the basic molecular, anatomical, developmental, and functional unit for odor mapping and odor processing.The pattern of activated glomeruli for a given odor is relatively constant across animals for equivalent odor stimulation conditions. However, the pattern can change under different experimental conditions.The pattern for a given odor characteristically includes sites in the medial and lateral bulb, refl ecting the pattern of projections of olfactory sensory neuron subsets. The patterns are characteristically bilaterally symmetrical, dependent on equivalent stimulating conditions on the two sides of the nose.Identifi ed glomeruli can be correlated with specifi c odors. This is true of the modifi ed glomerular complex in mammals, and particularly true of identifi able glomeruli in the insect. Different odors elicit activity in different, often overlapping, patterns. It is hypothesized that processing of the differing patterns by olfactory bulb circuits provides the basis for olfactory discrimination.A given homologous chemical series activates overlapping shifted patterns, refl ecting similarities of chemical structure in the series.At a weak concentration, an odor elicits activity in the single or small group of glomeruli receiving input from the olfactory receptor neuron subset whose receptor type is most sensitive to that odor. Higher odor concentrations activate increasing numbers of glomeruli. Changes in odor pattern with increasing concentration may be correlated with perceptual changes. It is therefore hypothesized that the odor patterns also are involved in the encoding of odor concentration. For references, see guidance. Because the neurons do not necessarily go to the B glomerulus, other factors besides the olfactory receptor must also be involved in axon guidance The olfactory bulb provides the fi rst stage of synaptic processing of the sensory information in the olfac-  neurons expressing the M50, P2, or P3 receptors in the periphery and the glomeruli they project to in the olfactory bulb. Replacing the P2 receptor with the P3 receptor results in a novel glomerulus very near the original P3 glomerulus. This argues that the P3 receptor can direct targeting to the P3 glomerulus, and that the receptor is instructive for guidance. Replacing the P2 receptor with the M50 receptor results in a novel glomerulus in between the P2 and M50 glomeruli. This argues that factors other than the receptor also infl uence guidance. From Within a glomerulus, olfactory axons make glutamatergic excitatory synapses onto the dendrites of the mitraltufted neurons. Each mitraltufted cell sends dendrites to one glomerulus, and thus relays the activity of one olfactory receptor to the brain. The dendrites of mitraltufted cells also form reciprocal synapses with the periglomerular cell. The mitral tufted dendrites make glutamatergic connections onto periglomerular cell dendrites, and dendrites of periglomerular cells form both GABAergic and dopaminergic synapses onto mitraltufted cell dendrites. These connections are believed to mediate numerous types of interactions, including serial excitatory synapses, as well as recurrent and lateral inhibitory synaptic circuits.In addition to intraglomerular processing, there is interglomerular processing. The axons of the periglomerular cells make synapses onto periglomerular cells in neighboring glomeruli and onto the dendritic shafts of neighboring mitraltufted cells. One action of these synapses may be to inhibit periglomerular cells and mitraltufted dendrites, thus providing contrast enhancement between neighboring glomeruli.The second level of synaptic processing in the olfactory bulb occurs through inhibitory connections between granule cells and mitral cells. Reciprocal dendrodendritic synapses that mediate mitraltuftedto-granule excitation and granule-to-mitraltufted inhibition cause activated mitraltufted cells to mediate feedback inhibition on themselves and lateral inhibition on their neighbors. Granule cells may participate in lateral inhibition onto a large population of neighboring cells that belong to neighboring glomerular units. It has been postulated that this inhibition contributes a more complex, more contextual type of contrast enhancement between cells belonging to different glomerular modules.The current model is that the main function of the dendrodendritic synapses present at both the glomerular and granule cell levels is to mediate lateral inhibition and the role of this lateral inhibition is to enhance contrast between different odors.The output of the olfactory bulb is carried by the axons of mitral cells and their smaller counterparts, the tufted cells. These axons project directly to olfactory cortex in the forebrain, the only sensory system to have this immediate access to the forebrain. The olfactory cortex has a three-layer structure that represents the primitive anlage of forebrain cortex found in fi sh, amphibia, and reptiles Like cortical regions in other systems, the olfactory cortex is differentiated into several different areas. The main area is the pyriform cortex. This area receives input from mitral tufted cells. It projects to the mediodorsal thalamus, which in turn projects to medial and lateral orbitofrontal areas of the neocortex. It is at this level that conscious perception of odors presumably takes place. Second is the olfactory tubercle, which receives input mainly from tufted cells. Third is the cortico-medial group of amygdalar nuclei, which receive specifi c input from the accessory olfactory bulb. Fourth is the lateral entorhinal area, which projects to the hippocampus. Last is the anterior olfactory nucleus, a sheet of cells just posterior to the olfactory bulb in subprimates.There is much current interest in stem cells and the possibilities they raise for maintaining or repairing brain function. The olfactory system is unique in the adult brain in being supplied by two sources of stem cells.First is the olfactory epithelium, where new ORNs arise from basal stem cells during development and throughout the adult life of the animal. During development, new ORNs expressing specifi c ORs differentiate from basal cells in the olfactory placode. During early life the process of neurogenesis is activated by dying ORNs, leading to a constant turnover of ORNs.The second example is the anterior migratory stream. Stem cells in the ventricular epithelium of the basal forebrain give rise to neural progenitor cells, which migrate in an anterior direction to the olfactory bulb, where they differentiate and become incorporated into the populations of granule cells and periglomerular cells. This process also occurs throughout adult life. Migration involves homotypic interactions between migrating cells, rather than migration along radial glia as in the cerebral cortex. Current studies are aimed at understanding how the new cells are incorporated into the processing circuits of the bulb.Almost nothing is known about the mechanisms controlling these processes. Further work is thus needed to understand the relevance of these mechanisms to olfactory processing, as well as gaining insights into the fundamental problems of stem cell functions in the brain.The olfactory system of Drosophila shares many common principles with the mammalian olfactory system, although scaled down to size. The smell organs of the fl y are its antennae and maxillary palp Neurons with the same specifi c receptor project to a single glomerulus in the antennal lobe. Consistent with the number of receptors, there are 49 glomeruli in the adult and 21 glomeruli in larvae. A complete map of the larval and adult antennal lobes has been made, identifying each receptor by the glomerulus that innervates it. Thus the organization of the olfactory system in Drosophila is remarkably similar to the mammalian system where neurons with different receptors project to different glomeruli.Because the numbers of receptors are much smaller, it has been possible to examine the selectivity of receptors to different odors. To determine the selectivity of different receptors, the responses of 24 different odor receptors to 110 different chemicals were examined. These studies revealed that approximately 70% of the odor-receptor combinations did not show increased fi ring rates, 30% showed increased fi ring rate, and 10% showed inhibitory responses. The number of odors that a receptor recognizes varied from none to thirty, with receptor response profi les ranging continuously from very narrow to broadly tuned. In general, receptors that are broadly tuned respond to structurally similar compounds. A single odor activated from one to 16 different receptors.Overall, these studies demonstrate that a given odor is sparsely encoded by the activation of a few receptors.Is there a chemotopic map in the Drosophila antennal lobe Knowing the odors that different receptors recognize as well as the glomeruli associated with all receptors has made it possible to map the distribution of odor responses in the antennal lobe. These studies argue that broadly tuned receptors occupy medial regions of the antennal lobe, and narrowly tuned receptors occupy more lateral regions. However, there is no obvious chemotopic organization: neurons responding to the same stimuli are not clustered together.Olfactory receptor neurons send axons to the antennal lobe. The second order neurons are projection neurons and local inhibitory interneurons. Each projection neuron sends dendrites to a single glomerulus and axons that branch to terminate in the protocerebrum and mushroom bodies of the fl y brain. The pattern of projections is invariant: each projection neuron sends dendrites to a specifi c glomerulus and has a characteristic, defi ned axon branching pattern in the protocerebrum and mushroom bodies that is invariant from individual to individual. These arborizations occur in the absence of olfactory neurons. Studies of the development of projection neurons argue that projection neuron identity is defi ned by the birthorder of the neuron. The picture that has emerged from these studies is that the connectivity of projection neurons is hard-wired.In general, although fl ies and mammals are separated by approximately 400 million years in evolution, the principles of olfaction are conserved in these organisms. In fl y olfaction, as in mammalian olfaction, one receptor is expressed per cell and neurons with the same receptor project to the same glomerulus. Moreover, the simplicity of the Drosophila system allows a complete description of the ligand-binding properties of ORs and their targeting in the olfactory bulb. Comparative studies of the olfactory systems of different organisms highlight the general strategies that animals use for chemical recognition. Interestingly, even organisms without a nervous system may have a sense of smell. In addition to the main olfactory pathway, an accessory olfactory pathway exists for the detection of pheromones in many species. Pheromones are speciesspecifi c and gender-specifi c chemical cues emitted by an individual and detected by other members of the species that provide information about the individuals social, sexual, and reproductive status. In general, pheromones cause stereotyped and innate changes in conspecifi cs behavior, either by direct, short-term effects on animal behavior or longer-term changes that alter the endocrine state. For example, one of the few vertebrate pheromones isolated is the sex pheromone of the red-sided garter snake. Female snakes produce this substance that is suffi cient to induce courting behavior in males. Another well-described pheromone is made by slave-maker ants. They emit a blend of chemicals that serve as an alarm signal, causing the slave-makers to attack other ants nests, and the resident ants to fl ee. An uncharacterized pheromone is thought be responsible for the Bruce effect in mice: a behavior in which the scent of a novel male will terminate the pregnancy of a recently inseminated female, providing the novel male the opportunity to produce offspring.The sensory structure for pheromone detection is the vomeronasal organ, also referred to as Jacobsons organ Axons of sensory neurons travel from the VNO to the accessory olfactory bulb, which is located at the dorsal posterior surface of the main olfactory bulb in rodents. Projection neurons then send axons to the bed nuclei of the accessory olfactory tract and stria terminalis, and the posteromedial cortical and medial nuclei of the amygdala. These projections do not overlap with projections from the main olfactory bulb, demonstrating that there is segregation of processing from the two systems.The sensory epithelium of the VNO is divided into an apical and a basal layer. Neurons in the apical layer express V1R receptors and those in the basal layer express V2R receptors. In general, each sensory neuron expresses one receptor, similar to the olfactory system of mammals. This suggests that each sensory neuron detects a small subset of chemical cues.Neurons from the apical layer project to the anterior region of the AOB and neurons from the basal layer project to the posterior AOB. Unlike the olfactory system, neurons with the same receptor do not project to one or a few glomeruli Because the TRPC2 ion channel is expressed in both the apical and basal layer of the VNO, it may act as an ion channel mediating detection of pheromones. To test this, mice were generated that lack the TRPC2 channel. The VNO is not activated by candidate pheromones in these mice by electrophysiological recordings, demonstrating a defi cit in VNO function. If the VNO is not functional, one prediction would be that these mice would lack pheromone-driven social behaviors such as mating and aggression. Consistent with this, mice lacking TRPC2 do not show aggressive behavior. Surprisingly, male mice without TRPC2 indiscriminately mate both females and males. The simplest interpretation of these studies is that mating does not require the VNO instead, the VNO is required to inhibit male-male courtship behavior and promote discrimination between the sexes. One caveat with these studies is that it is not clear that loss of TRPC2 eliminates all VNO function therefore it will be important to generate mice specifi cally lacking the VNO to determine its role in social and sexual behavior.Although evidence is accumulating that the VNO participates in pheromone-driven behavior in mice, the role of the VNO in human behavior is far less certain. Anatomical studies of the vomeronasal organ argue that this structure exists but lacks sensory neurons and nerve bundles in the adult. The accessory olfactory bulb exists in the fetus but regresses and is not present in the adult. Genomic studies demonstrate the TRPC2 gene is a nonfunctional pseudogene in humans. Moreover, almost all V1R pheromone receptors are pseudogenes. There are only two intact V1R sequences and no functional V2R sequences in the human genome. Taken together, these studies strongly argue that the accessory olfactory system does not function in humans.The loss of VNO in humans can be interpreted in two ways. One possibility is that humans do not detect pheromones and have evolved other strategies to ensure appropriate detection of mates and attackers. Alternatively, it is possible that humans detect odors through the main olfactory system that act as pheromones to elicit innate, stereotypical behaviors involved in reproduction and aggression.Although the accessory olfactory system has been classically thought to detect pheromones and the main olfactory system to detect a vast array of volatile cues, the distinction between the two noses is blurred both in terms of the compounds they detect and the behaviors they mediate. For example, electrophysiological studies show that sensory neurons in the VNO respond to volatile and nonvolatile compounds. Similarly, olfactory neurons depolarize in response to compounds classifi ed as pheromones. Mice that have a defective VNO lack many pheromone mediated behaviors, but not all. For example, pup suckling is a stereotyped behavior that is normal in TRPC2 mutants. Mice with a defective MOE do not mate, fi ght, or suckle, showing that the olfactory system also is required for innate stereotyped behavior. Thus, the best ways to distinguish the main and accessory olfactory systems are not by the ligands they recognize or the behaviors they mediate, but by their anatomical segregation in the periphery and central nervous system.The olfactory system enables animals to detect and discriminate between thousands of different odors. The enormous number of olfactory receptors allows for the ability to detect a vast array of odors. Each olfactory receptor recognizes a subset of chemical cues, with one odor activating more than one receptor and one receptor recognizing more than one odor. In the periphery, each olfactory neuron expresses only one olfactory receptor. Neurons with the same OR are distributed randomly in the nasal epithelium but they all project to the same glomerulus in the olfactory bulb. Thus, the activation of different olfactory receptors leads to the activation of different glomeruli in the central nervous system. Different combinations of activated glomeruli represent different smells. In Drosophila as well as mammals, one receptor is expressed per cell and neurons with the same receptor project to the same glomerulus, demonstrating that the logic of olfaction has been maintained through evolutionary time. In addition to the main olfactory pathway in vertebrates, a parallel accessory pathway exists for transmitting signals from less volatile odorous compounds called pheromones.Higher order processing begins in the olfactory bulb, where mitraltufted cells synapse onto olfactory neurons and transmit this information to the olfactory cortex. Periglomerular cells and granule cells provide inhibitory connections in the bulb that shape olfactory responses. Information is then relayed to fi ve different brain regions where it is ultimately translated into different odor percepts and behavior.Plants have devised a number of strategies to detect information about the outside world, and have mechanisms for detecting light, nutrients, and mechanical stimulation. Recent studies suggest that they might have a sense of smell as well Kristin Scott BOX 24.7 The somatic sensory system is burdened with many responsibilities. Beyond the obvious need to bring to consciousness events that occur along the skin surface, this system provides an organism with knowledge of where it is in space and it provides the motor system with feedback to control and coordinate action. Those are functions so diverse that minute variations on a common theme cannot accomplish them all. That is, the many demands on the somatosensory system cannot be met by subtle changes in gene expression or pattern of synapses or location of cell bodies. As a result, single neurons, large ensembles, and groups of interconnected regions use different tactics and strategies to achieve a fi nal goal.Neurons of the dorsal root and trigeminal ganglia are the only routes by which mammals receive information from the periphery of the body and of the face. These are pseudo-unipolar cells, with a single processan axon-that divides close to the cell body and sends separate branches out to the periphery and into the central nervous system Neuronal cell bodies in the dorsal root and trigeminal ganglia vary in size and in gene expression Peripheral branches of dorsal root ganglion cells enter peripheral nerves. Those of the trigeminal ganglion enter the trigeminal nerve. In a mixed nerve, with both sensory and motor axons, the ganglion cells provide more than a fair share of the large, myelinated axons and all of the thinly myelinated and unmyelinated axons. Conduction velocities vary because of these differences in axon diameter and degree of myelination. Classic studies divide the sensory axons in human peripheral nerve into the following groups with conduction velocities in parentheses: Group I or Aa, Group II or Ab, Group III or Ad, and Group IV or C. These groups correspond to functional classes that carry proprioceptive, mechanosensory, thermoreceptive, or nociceptive information from muscles, tendons, and skin to the spinal cord What sets apart ganglion cells of the somatosensory system from all other neurons carrying the name ganglion cell is the requirements for double duty. As ganglion cells of the somatosensory system they carry into the brain and spinal cord all the information about skin and deep tissues the CNS will ever have. Unlike . By way of these channels the tips of ganglion cells are depolarized to produce generator potentials. In addition, near the peripheral terminals of all sensory axons are voltage-gated Na  channels, responsible for initiation and conduction of action potentials. The best evidence suggests these voltage-gated channels are present at the fi rst node of Ranvier in myelinated axons or at a similar distance from axon tip in unmyelinated axons The modern tradition breaks up the axons of sensory ganglia into 13 varieties of receptors. These include four types of proprioceptors, three types of nociceptors, two groups of thermoreceptors, and four types of mechanoreceptors. That is a decidedly conservative point of view. At a minimum it leaves unmentioned the class of Dhair receptor or hair follicle afferent and it recognizes only the major type of nociceptors. Molecular and functional distinctions among the nociceptors alone add enough additional types to make the list approach 20. The point here is not to split peripheral receptors into the greatest number of types, but to emphasize the unusual nature of somatosensory transduction.Four types of mechanosensory axons are found in the hairless or glaborous skin and immediately adjacent deeper tissues of the human body All mechanoreceptors conduct action potentials in the Ab range, so no distinction can be made among them in that property. Rather it is in the response of the axon to a ramp-and-hold stimulus that the four types become clear. Two types of afferents respond at elevated rates for as long as a blunt mechanical stimulus is applied to its receptive fi eld. These are slowly adapting afferents, and they can be further divided into SAI and SAII types based on differences in their response to the applied stimuli The work of Iggo and Muir in the late 1960s established a consistent relationship between the four types of peripheral mechanoreceptor axons and the morphology of axon tips, or more properly of the axons relationship with nonneural cells. For three of the axons this structure-function relationship has held up well. The clearest example is that of the PC afferent, the unmyelinated tip of which ends as part of a Pacinian corpuscle. Unmistakable in its onion skinlike structure, the Pacinian corpuscle serves as a connective tissue fi lter of low frequency mechanical stimuli such as sustained pressure applied to the skin PC afferents are exquisitely sensitive to vibration. They display a peak response near 200 Hz with skin indentations of no more than 10 nm. Yet as pointed out earlier, a single indentation of the skin surface produces only a couple of spikes from these axons. Careful dissection of the connective tissue that surrounds the PC axon shows the axon itself is capable of generating a steady burst of action potentials with continued application of a blunt probe. The axon does not adapt. Rather, a change in structure of the fl uid-fi lled capsule carries the energy of a continually applied probe away from the axon tip and closes the cation channels responsible for mechanical transduction. By contrast, repeated application of a mechanical stimulus, such as occurs with a tuning fork vibrating at 200 Hz, produces a series of discrete transduction events and a series of action potentials. We can say with great confi dence, then, that PCs are responsive to high frequency vibration at even the smallest magnitude. This extreme sensitivity to vibration turns the PC afferent into a detector of remote events. These are the receptors, for example, that respond as hands gripping a steering wheel vibrate when a car travels over a rough road. As a more common and practical matter the minute vibrations transduced by PC afferents provide information about the texture of surfaces during the manipulation of tools.Lower frequency vibration, sometimes called fl utter, produces a maximal response in RA afferents. As is the case of PCs, the correlation between this type of response and the structure of the afferent axon and its surrounding tissue is consistent. Each RA afferent ends as a stack of broad terminal disks within a Meissners corpuscles. Both divergence and convergence is seen in the relationship between corpuscle and axon. Two RA afferents end in a Meissners corpuscle whereas each afferent innervates anywhere between 20 and 50 separate corpuscles. In addition to the Ab axons, C fi bers are also present in Meissners corpuscles of monkey glaborous skin. Whether these axons play a role in mechanosensation or provide the Meissners corpuscle with nociceptive and thermoreceptive properties is not yet known.The anatomy of the RA afferent says a great deal about what this mechanoreceptor does. Meissners corpuscles are found in dermal pockets of the adhesive ridges, as close to the epidermis as any dermal structure can be Of the two slowly adapting afferents, SAIs end in a manner that prompts no arguments. A single SAI axon breaks into several branches that end in several closely packed dermal ridges. Each branch ends in a series of axon terminals and each terminal is enfolded by an epidermal Merkel cell. This confl uence of dozens of axon terminals and their Merkel cells produces a surface elevation called a touch dome in the skin of cats and in the hairy skin of humans.Years  perception is approachable by a combination of psychophysics and neurophysiology because its dimensions are readily quantifi able. When the performance of individual receptors on the surface of a monkeys fi nger pad is compared with the performance of the monkey itself, only one type of afferent is sensitive enough to account for the animals ability to discriminate the form of a mechanical stimulus. That receptor is at the tip of SAI afferents ending in Merkels disk. One example is seen in the response to the type of dots used in Braille Peripheral factors contribute signifi cantly to the SAIs contribution to form and texture perception. One of these factors is the unique sensitivity of SAI afferents to strain energy density, a term that Johnson describes as "the energy required to produce local deformation" per unit volume of skin. Thus rather than responding to the total energy generated by application of a uniform stimulus, SAI afferents respond to even the slight imperfections in that surface and the local deformation of skin they produce. Movement of the skin across a surface, as in scanning Braille, greatly increases the energy produced by any imperfection and leads to a greatly enhanced response by SAI afferents. This fi nding has a strong intuitive feel to it, given the much greater tactile acuity each of us has when we move a fi ngertip along a surface with even slight imperfections.A second peripheral factor is that of surround suppression. Skin mechanics lead not only to local peaks in strain energy density but also to broader troughs. The result for any single SAI afferent are hot spots in its receptive fi eld surrounded by tissue that, when simultaneously probed, leads to a reduction in the response of that afferent. An average terminal domain for an SAI afferent on the fi nger tip may be as much as 5 mm 2 , but the presence of hot spots and surround suppression permits these afferents to signal the presence of a stimulus of as little as 0.5 mm.In contrast to tactile form, texture has relatively few dimensions but they are diffi cult to quantify. Nevertheless, a series of careful studies has documented that for variations in roughness, only the response of SAI afferents matches human perceptual ability. That is, the variation in fi ring rates among SAI follows precisely the perception human subjects have of surface roughness. Much the same can be said for the detection of surface hardness. Only the response of SAI afferents can account for human perception of how hard or soft is the surface of an object scanned by the fi ngertips. In summary, a combination of physiological and psychophysical studies leads one to conclude that SAIs provide the central somatosensory system with all the information it needs to detect the shape, hardness, and roughness of objects pressed or scanned across the skin.A second slowly adapting afferent in human skin, the SAII afferent, differs from an SAI in the greater size of its receptive fi eld, the reduced sensitivity to simple indentation of the skin, and the greater sensitivity to skin stretch. One surprising feature of these afferents is the less than universal presence of SAIIs across the short range of well-studied mammals. Direct recordings from the peripheral nerves of humans and of domestic cats show these afferents to be a commonly encountered feature of both species, but they do not exist in monkeys or mice. Just as perplexing is the poor correlation between structure and function with this receptor. The original correlative work in cats found SAII responses to arise from axons terminating in skin as Ruffi ni endings. These structures were fi rst described in human skin at the turn of the twentieth century, but a twenty-fi rst century study by M. Pare and colleagues found true Ruffi ni endings in human skin very rarely and only in the bed of fi ngernails. These fi ndings indicate SAII responses over most of the human hand arise from some other arrangement of mechanoreceptor axon and connective tissue sheath. Recent recordings from human peripheral nerves have added to the conundrum by documenting the presence of a third SA variety-labeled SA3-that has properties intermediate between the other two slowly adapting types. A conservative conclusion from these fi ndings is that some arrangement of nonneural cells, perhaps a classic Ruffi ni in cats but another confi guration in humans, leads to the cardinal feature of SAII afferents, namely a robust response to skin stretch. That confi guration could vary from one species to another and from one area of skin surface to the next, but in the end the nonneural tissue serves as a mechanical fi lter. Given the task of subtracting from the activity of a SAII afferent a response to simple deformation of the skin, the nonneural tissue leaves behind an unambiguous response to anything that stretches the skin.In addition to receptor types found in glaborous skin, hairy skin is innervated by a separate receptor, called the D-hair receptor or hair follicle afferent. It is the most sensitive receptor in hairy skin. The HFA threshold is said to be one-tenth that of any other afferent in mouse skin, and displacement of a hair follicle by as little as 1 mm produces robust responses in this population of receptors. Single afferents innervate more than one hair follicle and as a result, the receptive fi eld of an HFA is large. Unlike other mechanoreceptors, HFAs conduct action potentials in the Ad range, which translates into a velocity of 20-25 ms for humans but a much lower velocity in mice.A plot of SAI and SAII receptors along the human skin surface shows receptive fi eld size and density varies by a factor of four in the short distance from the fi ngertip to the wrist. As is the case for other sensory systems, wherever receptor density declines receptive fi eld size ascends. This inverse variation in receptive size and density is refl ected in the ability of a human subject to discriminate the two-dimensional shape of an object. Human performance in this area has been measured classically as two-point discrimination The most prominent receptors fulfi lling the function of sensing position and movement are muscle receptors and tendon receptors. These two have in common their sensitivity to stretch and the large diameter of the axons that carry the receptors activity into the CNS. The manner in which they are arranged, however, makes all the difference in the world. Muscle receptors are arranged in parallel with the muscle fi bers and as a result, these afferents respond when the muscle is stretched. As a common occurrence, muscle fi bers stretch when load is added to them in the form of weight or resistance. The resulting stretch of the extrafusal or work muscle fi bers produces a simultaneous stretch of the much smaller intrafusal muscle fi bers. The intrafusal fi bers have their own motor innervation and a sensory innervation from the largest diameter axons in a sensory nerve Much as muscle receptors are sensitive to muscle stretch, tendon receptors are sensitive to tendon stretch and provide information about muscle force. Because tendons are arranged in series with the muscles, so too are tendon receptors. What stretches the tendon is muscle contraction. In this regard, muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs signal the opposite trends. Spindles fi re when a muscle is relatively inactive and stretched whereas tendon organs fi re when the muscle is most active and contracted.By a defi nition of proprioception as an awareness of the position of the body and limbs, the two most prominent proprioceptors are necessary but not sufficient. More than just muscle and tendon receptors are at work. The related sense of kinesthesia, or awareness of position of moving body parts, is equally complex. Often used interchangeably for position sense, these two are complex percepts that require the contribution of receptors in muscle, skin, and joints as well as a sense of muscle exertion. Studies of the 1950s and 1960s focused on the contribution of joint afferents to a sense of limb position. The connective tissue and bones of joints are richly innervated and would seem to be in an ideal location to signal limb position. Yet a series of fi ndings in the 1970s made clear that a sense of position survived joint removal and the joint afferents, themselves, responded only at the extreme limits of joint fl exion. With no response in the usual, midrange of joint movement, these afferents could not signal position under most circumstances.Studies of more recent vintage have dealt principally with muscle spindle afferents as a major source of the position signal. Since all muscles are organized as antagonistic pairs, contraction of one delivers a robust stimulus to afferents of the antagonistic, stretched muscle. From these sorts of inputs, limb position and movement would appear to require a simple neural computation. That position sense is signifi cantly affected by stimulation, anesthesia and disengagement of spindle afferents adds weight to the argument that the burden of signaling limb position and movement falls on these receptors. Perhaps the most convincing data are from studies of illusory movements produced by tendon vibration. This type of stimulus selectively activates spindle afferents and leads to the perception of limb movement when none has occurred. Illusory movement is muscle specifi c, so that activation of arm fl exors gives rise to the percept of an arm that has extended. The illusion is so strong it gives rise to the Pinocchio effect: if arm fl exor afferents are activated when a subject is touching his or her nose with an index fi nger, the nose itself, is perceived to grow.Only in the past several years has proper attention been paid to the role of cutaneous receptors in position sense. In recording from peripheral nerve axons of human subjects, B. Edin has made a strong case for a unique response by an ensemble of SAII afferents to any position a limb or digit might adopt. Particularly compelling is the role these skin stretch receptors play in signaling the position of fi ngers. For the hand and fi ngers, therefore, a conscious sense of position appears to arise from the cooperative activity of SAII afferents, muscle afferents, and joint afferents.For most purposes anything that has produced tissue damage or that threatens do so in the immediate future can be defi ned as noxious and the type of axon that responds selectively to the noxious quality of a stimulus is, by defi nition then, a nociceptor. These are not pain receptors because nociception is not pain just as sensitivity to the wavelength of light is not color perception. Both are CNS constructs of peripheral events. Unlike color, pain has not only a perceptual component that involves comparison across receptors but also rich psychological and cognitive components. We will deal with those elements of pain perception but for now the most important principle to grasp is also intuitively obvious: the range of stimuli that are perceived as painful is very broad, from heat above 42C to acids below pH6, from a sharp pinch on the fi ngertip to a swollen ankle. Each of these is tied to the activity in a variety of nociceptors.True for all nociceptors is the simple morphology of their axon terminations. These are usually described as free nerve endings because unlike mechanoreceptive afferents, nociceptors end in no specialized capsule of nonneural cells. Another way of looking at this relationship is to notice that nothing extraneuronal serves as a fi lter or buffer between the nociceptive axon tip and its immediate environment. The only thing that determines the response of a nociceptor, then, is the type of protein receptor it inserts into its membrane.Nociceptors also differ from mechanoreceptors in how broadly the terminals of the peripheral axon branch as they reach target. Take the tip of the human index fi nger as an example. An individual SAI and SAII axon ends in a well-confi ned cluster of terminals over a distance as small as a few millimeters. Terminals of a single C fi ber, by contrast, end over an area of more than a dozen millimeters. This is the fi rst of several anatomical features along the nociceptive pathway that, together, produce a much coarser spatial sense for pain than exists for mechanosensation. Only the simultaneous activation of mechanoreceptors as occurs with puncture wounds or damaging compression permits a person to accurately detect the location of a nociceptive stimulus.The afferents that make up the nociceptive population can be subdivided into groups that are named by their axon conduction velocity and the response to noxious mechanical stimuli and noxious heat. Thus, an AM receptor conducts in the Ad range and responds to intense mechanical stimuli whereas a CMH receptor conducts in the C range and responds to both noxious mechanical energy and noxious heat Many afferents responding specifi cally to a mechanical stimulus carry the more rapid signals into the CNS, whereas those responding to the broad range of noxious stimuli conduct action potentials more slowly. These are the peripheral components to the two very different qualities of pain perceived by humans Two varieties of C nociceptors are found in mammalian skin. One of these is characterized by the presence of fl uoride-resistant acid phosphatase in its cytoplasm and cell-surface glycoproteins recognized by the isolectin I-B4 and the monoclonal antibody LA4. As none of these proteins is known to contribute to the physiological features of this C fi ber type their presence is currently a convenient feature that allows anyone studying them to recognize and target them. The situation is very different in the second type of C nociceptor. Present in its cytoplasm are two neuroactive peptides, calcitonin gene-related peptide and substance P. These play major roles in the function of the peptide-containing type of C nociceptor.Release of neuropeptides from the second type of C nociceptor is responsible for the axon refl ex The two classes of nociceptors that conduct action potentials in the C and Ad ranges are peripheral components for two types of pain. First pain carried by Ad axons reaches consciousness rapidly and is discriminative. Both the location and the subjective intensity of the stimulus can be judged with relatively good precision in fi rst pain. Second pain, in contrast, is much slower and is agonizing pain, with greatly reduced discriminative value.Recall that an individual C fi ber terminates over a wide area in skin, and so it is very likely that a punctate wound directly affects only a fraction of all that fi bers many branches. Action potentials generated at those directly affected branches invade all the peripheral branches as well as the parent axon that conducts the signal to the CNS. At all the peripheral terminals, substance P and CGRP are released onto two principal targets, the smooth muscle surrounding peripheral blood vessels and histamine-rich mast cells. By causing the arterial smooth muscles to relax, the peptides increase the fl ow of blood into the neighborhood of damaged tissue and produce a fl ow of water and electrolytes out of capillaries and into extracellular space. This process is referred to as extravasation. Histamine released from mast cells leads to a pronounced infl ammatory response. All of this is important for the infi ltration of damaged tissue with cellular elements that will protect against infection and promote repair. Yet what is most salient about the axon refl ex is the much greater sensitivity of the tissue surrounding a wound to anything that might be noxious. This primary hyperalgesia is a direct result of the axon refl ex, produced because the protein receptors inserted into nociceptive axons are sensitive to chemical changes produced by that refl ex.Both the histamine released by mast cells and the edema resulting from extravasation affect the response of nociceptors. Histamines effects are more selective, as only a subclass of the most slowly conducting C fi bers insert histamine receptors into the membranes of their axon terminals. A considerable body of evidence suggests these are peripheral receptors whose activity leads to the unpleasant percept of itch. A parallel system for itch that operates independently of histamine release has been discovered recently but the population of afferents involved is not yet known.Edema causes a general reduction in pH of extracellular fl uid from 7.4 to below 6.0. As outlined later, a general feature of protein receptors inserted into nociceptive axons is their sensitivity to the concentration of H  . By this path, activation of one branch of a C fi ber leads to increased sensitivity of all its branches and all neighboring nociceptors to noxious stimulation. At least some of those neighboring nociceptors are likely to be silent nociceptors, so named because they are unresponsive to intense mechanical stimulation under normal circumstances. When activated by changes in pH or the presence of factors that signal the presence of tissue damage the silent nociceptors become responsive to noxious stimuli.Two of the most powerful pain-inducing chemicals that can be delivered to a human observer are natural products of tissue damage. They are lipids of the prostaglandin family and the nonapeptide bradykinin FIGURE 25.8 The axon refl ex is a mechanism by which a class of C fi bers communicates with both the spinal cord and peripheral cells.Action potentials are generated at one branch of a peptide-containing C fi ber through tissue damage and the release of chemical signaling factors, including bradykinin and prostaglandin. Those action potentials invade not only the central branch of the axon but also the other peripheral branches. Substance P and CGRP released from the terminals of the C fi ber induce mast cells to release histamine and promote swelling by widening arterioles and shrinking the diameter of venules.Polymodal nociceptor activation occurs by way of a widespread family of receptor channels referred to as transient receptor potential. Relevant to the function of nociceptors is the subfamily of TRP-V channels, particularly of the channel protein TRP-V1 The central paths taken by large diameter afferents and small diameter afferents tell two stories worth paying attention to. The fi rst is that the path for mechanosensation and proprioception are separate and largely distinct from the path for nociception and thermoreception. These separate paths continue through the CNS to cerebral cortex and represent one of the clearest divisions of labor seen in any sensory system. The second story is seen in the multiple targets contacted by each population of axons. Here the lesson repeats a statement made at the beginning of this chapter. The somatosensory system has many tasks to perform, from the input side of motor refl exes to the higher order functions of perception, comprehension, and emotion. To accomplish them, mechanosensory proprioceptive and nociceptivethermoreceptive axons send information along several pathways performing separate functions. SI and SII are recognized in the cerebral cortex of all mammals that have been examined Serial processing of information is evident in both the physiology and connectivity of these areas. Area 3b is much more richly innervated by VPL and VPM than any of the other three areas of SI and, in terms of its structure and connectivity appears much more of a primary sensory area. Comparative studies suggest that area 3b of rhesus monkeys and humans is in most ways equivalent to all of SI in other mammals and so this area often is referred to as SI Proper. The principal outputs of area 3b are directed caudally to areas 1 and 2 and in a similar fashion, area 1 sends its own rich set of axons to area 2. From these considerations, a hierarchy emerges, with area 2 at something of a pinnacle, in that it receives a direct deep receptor input from the thalamus, indirect deep input from 3a and an indirect cutaneous input from areas 3b and 1.The output of SI as a whole is in two directions  A ventral path to SII and from there to caudal insula, areas of the temporal lobe and to premotor and prefrontal cortical areas. Eventual convergence of somatosensory, auditory, and visual information in medial temporal lobe is viewed as the path toward shape and form processing. This ventral path is vital for inserting new information into declarative memory and accessing established memories for comparison with ongoing events.  A dorsal path to superior parietal lobule, providing areas in that lobule with somesthetic information for control of voluntary movements, selective attention and information about how to perform different tasks, sometimes known as the "how" pathway.gyrus and its relationship to SII and the somatosensory association cortex in the posterior parietal lobe. Cross-section through the postcentral gyrus, cut orthogonal to the central sulcus. SI is divided into four anatomically and functionally distinct areas. They are bordered by area 4 of the precentral motor cortex and by area 5 of the parietal association cortex. Relationship between regions of cutaneous and deep input to VPL and the termination of thalamocortical axons in SI. The serial processing of somatosensory inputs also is indicated by the projections from one area of SI to others and from all areas in SI to the second somatosensory area. Adapted from With these essential elements in mind we will consider separately the paths for mechanosensation and nociception from the entry of primary afferents into the spinal cord to the areas of cortex in which the elements of sensation are brought together into a perceptual whole.Dorsal columns are the principal routes for spinal mechanoreceptor axons. All axons of sensory ganglion cells enter the CNS by way of dorsal roots and the trigeminal nerves. At a gross level the spinal cord is segmented by the existence of separate dorsal root ganglia. Because the peripheral tissue innervated by any one dorsal root ganglion is restricted, the entire innervation of the body surface can be seen as a series of overlapping bands. These are the dermatomes The dorsal roots divide after they have penetrated the dura mater but before they have entered the spinal cord itself. A medial division of large-diameter, heavily myelinated axons enters at the dorsal funiculus of the cord and the majority of those axons turn at right angles after they have entered the cord and ascend FIGURE 25.13 Classic dermatomal map showing the distribution of spinal nerves and the segments from which they arise. Despite extensive overlap between nerves arising from adjacent segments, this map permits localization of injuries and other conditions that give rise to restricted sensory defi cits. toward the brain. From level T7 of the cord to the terminal coccygeal segment, the large diameter axons enter one fi ber tract called the gracile fasciculus. And as they do so they stack up as thin sheets with the earliest entering axons occupying the most medial part of the funiculus and the last entering occupying the most lateral part. That same medial-to-lateral pattern continues with large axons that enter from T6 up to the fi rst cervical segment but at those levels the axons form a separate fasciculus, called the cuneate fasciculus. Together the gracile and cuneate fasciculi are called the dorsal columns. The orderly pattern established by the axons of the dorsal columns as they ascend means there is a body map or somatotopy to the ascending mechanosensory system. Large diameter axons ascend on the same side of the spinal cord as the one they entered to reach the lowest levels of the medulla.In a path toward sensory perception, the majority of axons in the dorsal columns ascend to reach the dorsal column nuclei at the junction of the spinal cord and medulla. The dorsal column nuclei are neither simple nor homogeneous. At the grossest level, each nucleus is divided into at least three regions in which group I afferents, PC axons, and SA axons terminate separately. In some species the neurons receiving spindle inputs are sufficiently distinct to be given their own name. All this serves to accent the role played by subcortical somatosensory nuclei in keeping segregated the input from different functional classes of receptors. At a fi ner level the dorsal column nuclei are broken up into clusters of large relay neurons separate from one another by bundles of axons and groups of small cells. These also serve to keep afferents segregated since, as seen in one example, mechanosensory axons from adjacent toes terminate in adjacent but separate clusters.Despite an anatomical convergence of primary afferents onto single neurons of the dorsal column nuclei, convergence and comparison of receptor input appears minimal. Studies in the laboratory of M. Rowe have shown that the coupling between a single neuron in the gracile or cuneate nucleus and a single afferent axon is extremely tight. As a result of this coupling, a single action potential in the afferent axon reliably produces an action potential in the postsynaptic cell. That phenomenon is seen for RA, PC and SAI afferents of the glaborous skin and hair follicle afferents of the hairy skin. These fi ndings indicate that for a neuron in the gracile and cuneate nuclei receptive fi eld locations, sizes and properties are a matter of which primary afferent innervates that neuron.The dominant input from a single afferent leaves room for synaptic processing to play a role in the function of the dorsal column nuclei. An anatomical basis for this inhibition is the signifi cant population of inhibitory interneurons scattered among the clusters of relay neurons. Several studies suggest inhibition suppresses a response to any input other than the most powerful afferent ending on a relay neuron. Thus, the convergence of multiple afferents on a single neuron is whittled down to the contribution of one dominant afferent by a powerful synaptic inhibition, mediated by GABAergic synaptic transmission. The peripheral source of this suppressive inhibition appears to be nociceptors, so that when C fi ber activity is eliminated, receptive fi elds in neurons of the dorsal column nuclei grow. The route by which nociceptive input reaches the dorsal column nuclei is indirect, most likely through a population of spinal cord neurons that receive convergent mechanosensory and nociceptive innervation. Because axons of these spinal cord neurons enter the dorsal columns they are called postsynaptic dorsal column axons.A cluster of mechanosensitive relay neurons is found in the lateral neck of the dorsal horn at cervical segments 1 and 2 and extends into the caudal one-third of the medulla. This is called the lateral cervical nucleus. Innervated by mechanosensory neurons in the dorsal horn throughout all segments of the spinal cord, the neurons in the lateral cervical nucleus display predominantly cutaneous receptive fi elds that cover large patches of hairy skin and usually some part of glaborous skin. In addition, responses to intense mechanical stimulation such as that carried into the cord by Ad mechano-nociceptors, are common in the lateral half of the nucleus. Most axons of cells in the nucleus decussate immediately and reach the contralateral VPL by way of the medial lemniscus. In VPL, the cervicothalamic axons responding to low-threshold mechanical stimulation of skin or hair appear to converge with axons that arise in dorsal column nuclei.Nociceptive inputs to the lateral cervical nucleus are relayed not only to thalamus but also the periaqueductal gray region in cats. The PAG is a complex region of the midbrain, populated by neurons that control functions as diverse as defense responses and sexual behavior. As outlined next, some neurons in this region are an essential part of a descending system for control of pain. The innervation of PAG by lateral cervical neurons that respond to intense mechanical stimulation is one route by which this descending system is informed of damaging events along the surface of the skin. Moreover, this input appears to end on PAG neurons that drive a fl ight response and can be seen, then, as the afferent side of a refl exive response to danger.Unlike other nuclei of the somatosensory system, the lateral cervical nucleus is an inconstant feature of the mammalian nervous system. Whereas it is a robust part of the spinal cord and medulla in rodents and carnivores and has been found consistently in nonhuman primates, it is present in only half the humans studied and is well defi ned in very few of them. Comparison across species also shows a marked difference in the density of cervicothalamic terminations in VPL, with the density in cats far exceeding that in rhesus monkeys. These fi ndings lead to the assumption that functions parceled out to the lateral cervical nucleus in rodents and carnivores are sequestered in the dorsal column-medial lemniscal system of primates, and particularly of humans.Medial lemniscal axons terminate on large neurons of VPL and VPM. As in the dorsal column nuclei, the synaptic means to generate lateral inhibitory infl uences exists in the thalamus but evidence for robust lateral inhibition is seldom found in these nuclei. Where inhibition has been detected, its strength across the neurons receptive fi eld matches that of the excitation so that the region of greatest inhibition is also the region of greatest excitation. Missing from this stage of somatosensory processing, then, is the synaptic means to produce contrast, by which activity produced by stimulation of one spot on the skin surface is compared with activity produced by stimulation of surrounding regions.Neurons in VPL and VPM display a cluster of features labeled as lemniscal properties. Static lemniscal properties are place and modality specifi city. Thalamic circuits maintain these features much as they exist in the lemniscal afferents, themselves. As a result, mixing of inputs is avoided and the specifi c properties of where on the body surface something has occurred and what exactly has occurred are kept anatomically distinct. Dynamic properties characteristic of these cells include the ability to follow a rapid train of stimuli as well as the incoming lemniscal afferent. Here the synaptic organization of the thalamus favors the ability to behave much like the lemniscal afferent. Axons of the medial lemniscus terminate as a series of very large axon terminals that form synaptic contacts with broad active zones on the primary dendrites of thalamocortical neurons. These synaptic arrangements in VPL and VPM insure a faithful transfer of information.Anatomical and physiological studies demonstrate that as lemniscal afferents terminate in VPL they do so as clusters of axon terminals elongated in the rostrocaudal dimension. They are referred to as rods. This appears to be the major organizing principle to somatosensory thalamus as lemniscal axons carrying information of the same type from the same part of the body terminate in a rod-like formation. On the output side, thalamocortical neurons that send axons to a 1 mm-wide patch in SI occupy the same sort of formation. Thus, thalamic rods are the anatomical basis for the most salient feature of somatosensory thalamus, the strict segregation of place-and modalityspecifi c responses.In stark contrast to the pattern of input by mechanosensory axons, nociceptive axons terminate in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. These lightly myelinated and unmyelinated axons enter the cord by way of a lateral division of the dorsal root and divide to send branches up and down the cord for a segment or two. The tract they form is a cap on the surface of the dorsal horn called Lissauers tract. Nociceptive axons terminate, therefore, on dorsal horn neurons across four or fi ve segments and a single dorsal horn neuron is innervated by nociceptors that cover a broad swath of the body or limb surface. A majority of second-order neurons innervated by the nociceptive axons then decussate and ascend in the anterolateral quadrant of white matter to reach the brainstem and thalamus.Spinal cord circuits for nociception form two ascending routes with distinct functions Spinal cord neurons that directly innervate thalamus occupy several laminae in rhesus monkey spinal cord. The major populations, however, are found in the most superfi cial layer of dorsal horn and a second region deeper in the dorsal horn. Nociceptive innervation of these two populations differs fundamentally. Lamina I neurons are innervated predominantly by C fi bers, both directly and indirectly by way of excitatory interneurons in the immediately adjacent superfi cial half of lamina II. They also receive an indirect innervation from Ad fi bers by those same interneurons and can be thought of as nociceptivespecifi c cells. Laminae IV and V neurons, on the other hand, are innervated predominantly by Ad fi bers that end deep in lamina II on a population of excitatory interneurons. Many of these deeper spinothalamic neurons also receive a convergent input from mechanosensory axons. Because they respond to both nociceptive and mechanosensory stimulation these neurons often are referred to as wide dynamic range cells.Axons from both lamina I neurons and laminae IVV neurons decussate and enter fi ber tracts in the anterolateral quadrant of spinal cord, but the tracts they enter differ from one another in location and termination Nociceptive specifi c neurons of lamina I enter the lateral spinothalamic tract and terminate in several nuclei of the thalamus, including two that receive few deep lamina inputs Outside the ventral posterior complex are two sites of spinothalamic terminations predominantly from lamina I Considerable disagreement exists with the source and meaning of the spinothalamic innervation in posterolateral thalamus of monkeys and humans. One part of the disagreement deals with the proportion of lamina I afferents that end inside the bounds of VPL and VPM and those that end caudal and medial to it. A. D. Craig and his colleagues indicate a majority of lamina I output targets a neurochemically distinct region outside VPL and VPM. They have given this region the name VMpo in apparent recognition of the data suggesting it is a nucleus separate and distinct from VPL and VPM. E. G. Jones and W. D. Willis and their colleagues hold to the traditional view that termination of axons from lamina I neurons is widespread, and includes VPL, VPM, and other thalamic nuclei, including POm. Jones, in addition, argues that what has been called VMpo is simply the most medial tip of VPM. That disagreement is not minor in its implications. An exclusive lamina I innervation of the region labeled VMpo turns it into a nociceptive-and thermoreceptive-specifi c relay nucleus, whereas the traditional view sees a major role for VPL and VPM in nociceptive and thermoreceptive relay. Resolution of this question has not been a simple matter, as studies favoring and re futing the central premise of a nociceptive-and thermoreceptive-specifi c VMpo are common in the experimental and clinical literature. If the most conservative conclusions are adopted, we are left to recognize spinothalamic innervation of four thalamic regions, each with its own cortical target. Spinothalamic terminations in VPL and VPM are relayed to SI and those in VPI to SII. Together, they can be seen as a lateral path to fi rst or discriminative pain. A second medial path to anterior cingulate by way of MDvc and to the insula by way of POm and the neurons of the region designated VMpo appears to be the central route for second or punishing pain.Nociceptive responses in SI have been diffi cult to record and where neurons responding to noxious stimuli have been encountered, their location has not been easy to fi t into a general scheme of what these areas do. Nevertheless, ablation studies in monkeys show SIs involvement in pain perception and studies of human cerebral cortex regularly show SI responds to stimuli judged to be painful. Perhaps the most compelling story can be told for area 1 of SI in monkeys, where evidence exists of clustered organization for nociceptive neurons. Yet these neurons do not form columns. They are largely confi ned to layer IV of that area and are intermixed with mechanosensory neurons. These data suggest that nociceptive and mechanosensory inputs converge in area 1, perhaps as a means to accurately locate the source of pain.Functional imaging studies of the human brain indicate four areas of cerebral cortex are active during the application of a painful stimulus. Activation of SI and of SII occurs as part of a discriminative component to painful stimuli. A subjects ability to report the location and grade the intensity of a stimulus is correlated with activity in these areas. Two other areas appear tied to the cognitive and emotional content of pain. These are the rostral half of the anterior cingulate gyrus and the rostral insula, both of which display elevated activity during the anticipation of painful stimuli and the infl iction of pain on a loved one. And it is these areas that show a reduction in activity when the administration of a placebo produces reports of lessened pain. As a group, then, studies of the cortical representation of pain point to a distributed network of four main areas in which the noxious stimulus applied to some peripheral region becomes a painful sensation with both discriminative and punishing components.Several paths are taken by fi rst-and second-order nociceptor axons that reach neither spinothalamic neurons nor regions of the thalamus. Targets of these axons include the following: spinal interneurons that mediate the withdrawal and crossed-extensor refl exes the pontine reticular formation, where the startle refl ex is generated and the midbrain periaqueductral gray as a means to control pain. The last of these is a well-studied mechanism tide, met-enkephalin as a neurotransmitter. Metenkephalin is an opioid peptide that binds to a member of the opiate receptor family. Its actions are mimicked by the administration of morphine and synthetic opiates accounting for at least part of the analgesic properties those compounds possess.Pain is such a rich experience with an obvious impact on the well-being of a person that unusual phenomena associated with pain have been studied in considerable depth. Among the best studied are referred pain, secondary hyperalgesiaallodynia and phantom limb pain. Each has been explained by referring to the circuitry and chemistry of normal nociceptive processing. Referred pain is the experience in which noxious stimuli in the viscera is felt as pain in a peripheral location such as the shoulder. A classic explanation for referred pain notes the widely branching nature of C and Ad fi bers as they enter the cord, so that lamina I neurons innervated by nociceptors of the shoulder are also innervated by nociceptors of the pericardium. When the latter are driven to fi re a series of action potentials the percept is one of a more common occurrence, shoulder pain.Central or secondary hyperalgesia and allodynia are related phenomena that occur in response to synaptic plasticity at the level of the spinal cord. Secondary hyperalgesia is a phenomenon in which a greater degree of pain is felt upon application of a noxious stimulus. Allodynia, by contrast, is the perception of pain when the stimulus itself is not noxious. Each occurs when the application of an intense or prolonged noxious stimulus leads in spinal circuits to a rearrangement in synaptic strength, much like long-term potentiation. With secondary hyperalgesia, the potentiation is homosynaptic, leading to a greater postsynaptic response in spinal neurons to a noxious stimulus. Plasticity with allodynia is thought to be heterosynaptic. Under normal circumstances, activity in Ab fi bers to a benign mechanical stimulus modulates a response to noxious stimuli but fails to drive spinothalamic cells. Yet when the synapses formed by the Ab fi bers are potentiated in response to an intense or prolonged barrage of C fi ber activity spinothalamic neurons are driven by that mechanical stimulus. The result is perception of pain where only nonnoxious mechanical stimulation has occurred.Unlike allodynia, phantom limb pain appears to involve synaptic plasticity at each of several levels in the somatosensory system. Removal of a digit or limb in experimental animals and in humans leads to a robust functional plasticity. In cases fi rst documented by J. Kaas and M. Merzenich and their colleagues, surgical removal of digits produces a short-lived silent zone in the somatotopically appropriate part of SI. Quickly thereafter, the previously silent region becomes responsive to tactile stimulation. Yet the newly acquired response is to adjacent body parts, as the activity evoked in neighboring receptors fi lls in the zone where the cortex had been silent. Subsequent work has shown that following amputation of a digit or limb, this process of fi lling in takes place through synaptic changes in the spinal cord, medulla, and thalamus, as well as in cerebral cortex. It is assumed that phantom limb pain works much the same way. Thus, stimulation of the shoulder and chest in amputees drives regions of cerebral cortex that had been responsive to stimulation of an arm prior to its amputation. The result is the percept of arm pain even in the absence of an arm. The spinal trigeminal nucleus is an elongated nucleus, split into three subnuclei distinguished geographically by reference to the obex. Pars oralis occupies the lower pons and upper medulla to the level of the obex. It gives way to the pars interpolaris at the obex and then to pars caudalis through the lower medulla and into the fi rst two cervical segments of the spinal cord. Borders between these subdivisions are hardly distinct as afferents innervating a restricted part of the face may end across two or all three parts of the spinal trigeminal nucleus. The traditional subdivision of the spinal nucleus into functional units accents the mechanosensory functions of pars oralis, the deep receptor functions of pars interpolaris, and the nociceptive and thermoreceptive functions of pars caudalis. In this context, the relay of input from pars caudalis to VPM is viewed as the equivalent of the spinothalamic system for the face. Yet studies of C fi bers that innervate tooth pulp fi nd these afferents terminate in a long, continuous sheet from the caudal half of the principal nucleus to the caudal-most aspect of pars caudalis. These data indicate a great deal more intermixing of mechanosensory neurons and nociceptive neurons takes place in the trigeminal system than is seen for the spinal somatosensory system.The third nucleus of the sensory trigeminal system is the most unusual. Incorporated into the CNS as the mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal system is a collection of ganglion cells that give rise to muscle spindle afferents. This nucleus is one of only two in the CNS to contain neurons of neural crest origin. The central processes of the ganglion cells innervate several targets, the most prominent of which is the motor trigeminal nucleus.Between the level of the peripheral afferent, where skin mechanics produces surround suppression and the level of the cerebral cortex, the somatosensory system is unusual in the sparseness and weakness of lateral inhibition. As discussed earlier, the synaptic means to generate lateral inhibition exist in the dorsal column nuclei and thalamus, but the response of a single neuron in those regions appears very much like the response of the one axon that drives it best. Neurons in SI, however, display true inhibitory surrounds As a result of circuits in cerebral cortex, the roughly circular receptive fi elds that enter SI by way of thalamocortical axons become orientation-selective responses in 70% of cortical neurons. The synaptic mechanism for generating a receptive fi eld tuned to the orientation of a stimulus could be convergence of excitatory inputs, much like the mechanism proposed originally for orientation tuning in visual cortex. Yet examination of spatial-temporal response of neurons in SI indicates orientation selectivity is best explained by the presence and spatial distribution of inhibitory regions.Area 3b is considered an early step in the cortical processing of tactile information. Much of the data FIGURE 25.18 The receptive fi eld of a neuron in area SII from a macaque monkey is overlayed on the glaborous surface of a human hand.On each fi nger pad are rasters showing the response of the SII neuron to a bar indented at 8 orientations. Histograms are also shown for the most responsive and least responsive orientation. Shown on the palm are tuning curves for each fi nger pad. These results demonstrate that neurons in SII have large receptive fi elds so that tuning to orientation of a bar on one fi nger pad is the same as the tuning across other pads. Adapted from Cover illustration of J. Responses of like type are organized as columns in SI. The original description of cortical columns was made by V. Mountcastle in his 1953 study of cat somatosensory cortex. For SI in macaques one of obvious place for columnar processing is in the RA and SA responses. As expected neurons in monkey area 3b directly innervated by thalamocortical axons show strong specifi city for either RA or SA inputs. These neurons are in layer IV and deep layer III. Yet superfi cial to this layer, where neurons of layer IV send their axons, the response is predominantly slowly adapting. In other words, the response of neurons outside layer IV makes it appear as though rapidly adapting inputs are incorporated into a slowly adapting output.Nevertheless neurons in areas 3b and 1 are clearly involved in the discrimination of vibrotactile stimuli at low frequencies, such as those carried into the CNS by RA afferents. The work of R. Romo and his colleagues documents a response of SI neurons in macaques that is tied to the frequency of a stimulus applied to the fi ngertips. A monkeys ability to discriminate between two stimuli of different frequencies is only as good as an SIs neurons ability to signal that difference. And when electrical stimulation of SI is used as a replacement for one of those vibratory stimuli, a monkey will indicate that he perceived a stimulus of that frequency. This perceptual ability is not tied to the frequency of the SI neurons response but to the number of spikes generated in the fi rst 250 milliseconds. Thus, not only does a population of SI neurons contribute to the perception of fl utter but also the neural code used by those neurons is an intensity code.At fi rst glance the division of labor that is a hallmark of SI contrasts strongly with the presence of a single area called SII. Recent functional and anatomical studies show, however, that across the 10 mm in the upper bank of the lateral fi ssure that normally defi nes SII in macaques are multiple functionally distinct areas. In monkeys three separate regions have been described, referred to as SIIa, SIIc, and SIIp. Anatomical studies in humans suggest there are also four separate regions called OP1-OP4, yet how the human studies relate to the monkey studies is not known.Ablation studies in monkeys reveal three features of SIIs role in somesthesis: Removal of all SII leaves a macaque incapable of discriminating the shape and texture of a tactile stimuli. These data show any or all subdivisions of SII play a pivotal role in tactile behavior. Removal of SII has no effect on the response of neurons in SI. So, even though SII provides feedback projections to SI, the dominant input to SI comes from neurons of VPL and VPM. Removal or cooling of SI eliminates the tactile responses in SII.These results extend to modality-specifi c loss in SII following ablations restricted to one area in SI. A modern view of SII suggests it is a complex of at least three functionally distinct areas. The anterior and posterior portions are involved in integrating proprioceptive inputs with cutaneous input as a means for representing the size and shape of objects held in the hand. In addition, a central fi eld responds to cutaneous inputs and is important for processing information about 2D shape and texture discrimination.Receptive fi eld properties of neurons in macaque SII support the conclusions that SII is part of a serial processing scheme Whereas only a small percentage of neurons in SI are affected by attentional focus of animals, practically all the neurons in SII show attention modulated responses. Psychophysical studies show attention is a spotlight with fi nite boundaries that can improve performance on each of many tactile discrimination tasks. These studies raise questions as to the targets and mechanism of an attentional effect. Single unit studies show SII to be one of the major targets as the response of individual neurons changes with shifts in attention. Mechanisms by which attention appears to exert its effects include a change in the response rate and a shift to synchronous activity. Pairs of neurons in macaque SII recorded at the same time are found to become more synchronous in their response to a tactile stimulus when an animal has been cued to pay attention to that stimulus. As the task becomes more diffi cult, when the difference between two stimuli is deliberately reduced, the degree of synchrony increases by a factor of four. These data show that not only is SII a nodal point for the discrimination of form and texture but it is also a site at which cognitive mechanism like selective attention are likely to exert their greatest infl uence.The auditory system detects sound and uses acoustic cues to identify and locate sounds in the environment. The auditory system shares functional and evolutionary similarities with other mechanoreceptive systems, such as the vestibular system and the lateral line system of lower vertebrates. All these systems use the same type of receptor cell-the hair cell-and all are specialized to detect an external stimulus that eventually causes the stereocilia of the hair cells to be displaced. Unlike other mechanoreceptive systems, the auditory system is sensitive to sound. This chapter explores the characteristics of the auditory system that make it sensitive to sound and that make it capable of localizing a sound source. The generalized mammalian auditory system is emphasized, but examples also are taken from studies of animals with specialized auditory systems, such as those of bats and owls, which have greatly advanced our knowledge of audition.The peripheral auditory system is divided into the external, middle, and inner ears Mechanosensitive organs in lower vertebrates, such as the lateral line of fi sh, are sensitive to vibrations in aquatic environments. When vertebrates evolved onto land, they faced the problem of converting sound in air to sound in fl uid, as the inner ear of vertebrates remains fl uid fi lled. Sound at an air-fl uid interface is almost completely refl ected back into the air, rather than being transmitted into the fl uid. The function of the middle ear is to ensure effi cient transmission of sound from air into the fl uid of the inner ear The middle ear begins at the tympanic membrane, continues with the three middle ear ossicles, and ends at the footplate of the stapes, which contacts the inner ear fl uids at the oval window of the cochlea One disease that causes a conductive hearing loss is otosclerosis, in which bony growths around the stapes cause it to adhere to surrounding bone and lessen its transmission of vibration. A surgical procedure called a stapedectomy usually restores hearing by replacing the native stapes with a prosthetic one.The inner ear is located deep within the head Hair cells With the hair bundle in its resting, unperturbed position The relationship between degree of bundle defl ection and receptor potential magnitude is neither linear nor symmetric The molecular basis of the hair bundles response polarity appears to reside in specialized structural attachments at the tips of stereocilia The speed of the hair cell transduction process is incredibly fast compared to transduction in other sensory systems, such as vision, olfaction, and the taste modalities of sweet and bitter. The delay between a bundle defl ection and the onset of receptor current is estimated to be about 10 ms at 37C THE COCHLEA of the basolateral membrane is also highly voltage dependent The mammalian organ of Corti rests upon an acellular basilar membrane Outer hair cells are cylindrically shaped and decrease in resting length by a factor of about four from the apical to the basal ends of the cochlea. When an isolated OHC is stimulated electrically, it responds by altering its length Through a variety of experimental approaches, motor activity has been shown to be restricted to the lateral membrane of the OHC. sensor is confi rmed by measuring gating charge movements under voltage clamp while blocking ionic conductances. These gating currents represent the restricted movement of the charged voltage sensor within the plane of the lateral membrane increasing voltage will move more charge according to Boltzmann statistics. Maximum charge moved is about 7500 em 2 . This value also is believed to characterize the density of motor molecules in the lateral plasma membrane. The plot of charge versus voltage is sigmoidal Because hearing sensitivity and frequency selectivity in mammals span the kiloHertz range, any mechanism designed to augment hearing must function at these rates. Indeed, OHC motility has been demonstrated, in vitro, to extend well into the tens of kiloHertz range. Nevertheless, because the mechanical response is voltage dependent, it will be affected by the RC time constant of the OHC. In this scenario, at high frequencies, transmembrane ac receptor potentials, which presumably drive the mechanical response in vivo, will be attenuated greatly. Consequently, aIn 1978, David Kemp made a surprising discovery: the ear can sometimes emit sounds. These "otoacoustic emissions" are now the focus of much interest because basic researchers can use them to study the function of the ear and because clinicians can use them as tests of hearing There are two main types of emissions-spontaneous and evoked-the latter are evoked in response to an externally presented sound. Spontaneous emissions are detected from the ears of about one-third of normal hearing humans, but these emissions are rare in laboratory animals. They are almost always pure tones. Transient-evoked emissions are evoked by a short sound such as a click and appear several to tens of milliseconds later. These emissions were fi rst called the "cochlear echo," but they are not a real echo because more energy can appear in the emission than was present in the evoking sound. Distortion product-evoked emissions Otoacoustic emissions can be used clinically as a screening tool in hearing tests, as subjects with sensory hearing losses greater that 30 dB typically lack emissions. Transient-evoked or distortion product-evoked emissions are used in such tests. Emission-based tests are especially valuable for individuals such as infants who are otherwise hard to test by conventional audiometry. Otoacoustic emissions only rarely are the cause of tinnitus, the sensation of ringing in ones ears. Most individuals who have tinnitus do not have emissions corresponding to the tinnitus. Thus, tinnitus arises by some other mechanism, almost certainly within the nervous system.  The microphone records the sound pressure of the two primary tones that were used to evoke the emission at 2f 1 -f 2.From current debate focuses on the relative contributions of lateral membrane activity and stereocilia activity, each of which is capable of force production. Active mechanical responses of the stereocilia bundle may be driven by calcium infl ux through calcium-sensitive, mechanically activated stereocilia channels, and thus may not be limited by the membrane fi lter. Of course, identification of the important role of chloride in the function of prestin in vivo and its mechanically activated fl ux through the lateral plasma membrane may underlie a similar voltage independence. In this way the OHCs of the mammalian inner ear may have overcome the limiting effects of the membrane fi lter at highfrequency acoustic stimulation. To summarize, OHCs, probably through a mechanical feedback scheme, are required to boost BM motion and enhance frequency selectivity, a process termed the "cochlear amplifi er." In the absence of OHCs or with a deletion of the gene for Prestin An increase in the sensitivity of hair cells is made possible by the unique composition of the inner ear fl uids. Within the inner ear, fl uids are contained in three compartments known as scalae: scala tympani, scala media, and scala vestibuli The organ of Corti, which contains the hair cells, is located at the junction between endolymph and perilymph Sensorineural hearing loss results from damage to hair cells or, less commonly, from damage to afferent nerve fi bers Current research on the cochlea is centered on the mechanisms of outer hair cell motility and how this motility contributes to basilar membrane motion. The mechanisms of how sound causes active stereocilia motion remain to be worked out. Substantial interest focuses on the processes and factors involved in hair cell regeneration with the eventual hope that approaches like stem cell implants might encourage restoration of The cochlear implant is one of the most successful prostheses used to stimulate the nervous system The cochlear implant consists of a microphone to detect sound, an electronic "processor" that transforms the sound waveform into a code of electrical stimuli, and an array of stimulating electrodes in the cochlea. The electrode array In some individuals that have received implants, comprehension of speech is possible, even when there are no other cues such as lip reading. These individuals can carry on a normal conversation, even via telephone. In other individuals, however, full speech comprehension is not restored but the implant, together with lip-reading ability, assists with spoken conversation. It also provides for the detection of important sounds such as the ring of a telephone and the approach of a vehicle. Variability in the success of the implant from patient to patient probably depends on the number of surviving primary auditory neurons, the exact orientation of the electrodes with respect to the neurons, and the coding scheme of the processor that is used. The individuals motivation and the assistance received from clinicians are also likely to be important factors. Finally, individuals who have become deaf after the acquisition of spoken language reacquire language ability more easily than prelingually deafened individuals, almost certainly because of differences in the central nervous system. Cochlear implant research is focused on making improved designs for the processor and electrodes so that in the future implant users may be able to more fully comprehend speech. function in the mammalian cochlea. The improvement of cochlear implants is also a very active area of clinical research.Hair cells receive their primary afferent innervation from neurons of the spiral ganglion, located in the central core, or modiolus, of the cochlea Type I auditory nerve fi bers respond to sound and transmit these responses to the brain via discrete action potentials the passive mechanical characteristics of basilar membrane motion with little contribution from outer hair cells.The relationship between CF and its point of innervation in a type I fi ber has been studied by single unit labeling Responses of auditory nerve fi bers can show timelocked discharges at particular phases within the cycle of the sound waveform, a property known as phase locking The response of a single auditory nerve fi ber increases with sound level until a point at which the rate of the fi ber no longer increases and is saturated Although there may be a continuum of SR, three main groups of fi bers have been defi ned, and these groups predict many physiological and anatomical characteristics of auditory nerve fi bers. The high SR fi bers have higher sensitivities than medium and low SR fi bers The auditory nerve response to one stimulus may be masked, or hidden, by the presence of other stimuli. Masking involves properties of auditory nerve response such as adaptation and two-tone suppression, and possibly refractory properties. In adaptation, fi ring to a tone burst is high initially and then lessens, or adapts, THE AUDITORY NERVE to a steady state over time The auditory periphery and other hair cell organs receive an efferent innervation from the brainstem Medial OC neurons may also reduce the effects of masking noise on the responses of auditory nerve fi bers. Decreases in responses by maskers can occur by adaptation and suppression. The effect of OC stimulation on masked responses to tone bursts can be to enhance the response Although the function of type I auditory fi bers is fairly well understood, we do not yet know how afferent fi bers of the outer hair cells, the type II auditory nerve fi bers, function in the hearing process. Future experiments will provide insight into the roles played by different spontaneous rate groups of type I auditory nerve fi bers. More work is needed to identify the mechanisms used to prevent the degradation of signals by masking noise. These mechanisms could potentially be applied clinically in the design of hearing aids and cochlear implants.The auditory nerve terminates centrally in the cochlear nucleus, which in turn projects to the other auditory nuclei of the brain stem: the superior olivary complex, nuclei of the lateral lemniscus, and inferior colliculus An important characteristic of most central auditory nuclei is tonotopic organization, the mapping of neural CF onto position Under certain conditions, tonotopic mappings have been shown to be capable of plastic changes The cochlear nucleus is the auditory center that is understood best at the cellular level Use of PST histograms is helpful not only in classifying units, but also in revealing functional properties of the neurons. Let us consider the example of primary-like units. The primary-like pattern reveals that the spherical bushy cell faithfully has preserved the temporal properties of the auditory nerve fi ber response and implies that these units receive endbulbs from nerve fi bers. In contrast, other types of cochlear nucleus neurons alter the spike patterns of the auditory nerve fi bers and presumably have distinct functions. For instance, onset units respond mainly at the onset of a short tone burst Another important way to classify neurons in the cochlear nucleus, as well as throughout the auditory nervous system, is by the response map of a neuron Other response types have progressively larger inhibitory areas for example, type IV neurons have only a small excitatory area near CF and a narrow, knife-sharp excitatory area above CF, with the rest of their area dominated by inhibition. This inhibition is generated by inhibitory circuits within the dorsal cochlear nucleus, in part from type II neurons. Type IV neurons correspond to the main projection neurons of the dorsal cochlear nucleus, the pyramidal neurons, whereas type II neurons are likely to be inhibitory interneurons. One hypothesis for the functional role of type IV neurons is that their sharp borders between excitatory and inhibitory areas serve to detect the spectral notches that result from the acoustic characteristics of the external ear, especially the pinna. These notches could be used for sound localization, as their frequencies depend on sound source location. The notches also depend on position of the pinna in fact, type IV neurons receive input from brain stem somatosensory nuclei that may inform the type IV neurons about the position of the animals moveable pinna. Animals that lack a moveable pinna, such as humans and cetaceans, have a dorsal cochlear nucleus that differs greatly from that of other mammals by being unlayered and possibly lacking in several cell types.A fi nal important way to classify neurons is by their laterality of response, which is defi ned as whether the neuron responds to the contralateral or ipsilateral ear and whether the response is excitatory or inhibitory The largest synaptic terminals in the brain are contained in the central auditory pathway. There are two types of these giant synaptic terminals: endbulbs of Held, which are found in the ventral cochlear nucleus Endbulbs and calyces enable secure transmission of information to their postsynaptic neurons. Endbulbs of Held are formed by primary auditory nerve fi bers each nerve fi ber forms one or sometimes two endbulbs. The endbulbs contact and completely encircle their postsynaptic target, the spherical bushy cells of the cochlear nucleus The large infl uence of the endbulb would, for most neurons, last many milliseconds so that two closely spaced presynaptic spikes would produce only one postsynaptic spike or a second spike that was delayed, thus smearing in time the pattern of input spikes. However, the bushy cell membrane potential recovers quickly because its membrane contains specialized K  channels that allow the cell to repolarize after fi ring an impulse so it is "reset" and ready to fi re again An important function of the auditory system is to determine the location of sound sources in space. Binaural sound localization occurs when cues from both ears are used to locate sounds The decline in phase locking for frequencies above 1 to 3 kHz is a second reason that phase differences are less important for localizing sounds at high frequencies.Interaural level differences result when the head forms a "sound shadow," reducing the level of sound at the ear away from the source Two neural circuits that provide sensitivity to ITD or ILD are within the superior olivary complex The Jeffress model recently has been challenged: new data in small mammals demonstrates that the best delays are outside the physiological range for the size of the animals head and the neural inhibition in the MSO is not explained in the Jeffress model A second neural circuit in the brain stem, within the lateral superior olive, generates responses that are sensitive to ILDs When the sound is of equal level in the two ears, the strong contralateral inhibition usually dominates and there is little response. These neurons are thus excited by sound sources located on the ipsilateral side of the head. As the lateral superior olive projects centrally, this ipsilateral-side response is transformed to a contralateral-side response by crossing to the inferior colliculus on the opposite side. are indicated. Circuit of the medial superior olive, which is sensitive to interaural time differences. Input to the cochlear nucleus from the auditory nerve terminates at the large endbulbs of Held that synapse onto spherical bushy cells  As mentioned earlier, ILDs are most important for sound localization at high frequencies and the LSO has a tonotopic organization that is composed predominantly of neurons with high characteristic frequencies.Ascending input from lower brain stem centers converges at the inferior colliculus, which is an obligatory synaptic station for almost all ascending neurons. The inferior colliculus consists of several subdivisions, the best studied of which is the large, laminated, central nucleus. In the central nucleus, direct input from the cochlear nucleus interacts with binaurally responsive input from the MSO and LSO. Terminals from the MSO and LSO may have limited spatial overlap, however, as the central nucleus is organized tonotopically. Low CF input projects to the dorsolateral part of the colliculus and high CF input projects to the ventromedial part. Many low CF collicular neurons are sensitive to ITDs, like their MSO inputs, whereas many high CF collicular neurons are sensitive to ILDs, like their LSO inputs. Interestingly, large lesions of the superior olivary complex do not completely disrupt ILD sensitivity in the colliculus this is evidence that ILD sensitivity is created anew at levels above the LSO. ILD sensitivity may be created in part by the dorsal nucleus of the lateral lemniscus, a nucleus within the lateral lemniscus that sends a large inhibitory projection to the colliculus. ILD sensitivity may also be created anew by inhibitory mechanisms within the colliculus. Additional circuits for the generation of ITD sensitivity have not been identifi ed, thus the colliculus appears to be sensitive to ITD because of its inputs from the MSO.An important question is whether the colliculus uses its inputs to form a "space map"-a mapping of sound source location to position within the brain. Such a mapping has not been reported in the mammalian inferior colliculus, but a mapping exists in the deep layers of the superior colliculus, where it is in register with a mapping of the visual fi eld. These deep layers of the superior colliculus have sensorimotor functions concerning orientation movements of the head, eyes, and pinnae. Another auditory space map has been observed in the barn owl, which hunts for prey in darkness using acoustic cues The medial geniculate and auditory cortex contain subdivisions that have clear tonotopic organization, as well as subdivisions with less obvious tonotopy Other cortical fi elds have less rigidly organized tonotopy or little tonotopy. These fi elds are secondary, ventral, temporal, and dorsoposterior. Also indicated are suprasylvian sulcus and anterior and posterior ectosylvian sulci. From The medial geniculate exerts its infl uence on ascending information, but it does so with extensive infl uence from the cortex. The medial geniculate receives a large number of projections from the auditory cortex: it probably receives more input from auditory cortex than from lower centers. One large projection is from the tonotopic cortical fi elds AI and A to the tonotopic ventral division of the medial geniculate. Apparently, however, the geniculate mediates some functions that do not require the cortex. For example, fear conditioning is a behavior that can be established by pairing a sound with a painful electric shock in rats. After conditioning is established, conditioned responses such as an increase in blood pressure can be elicited by sound alone. Work by Joseph LeDoux has shown that lesions of the auditory pathway up to and including the geniculate have a large effect on such conditioning however, lesions of the auditory cortex do not produce large alterations. Pathways directly from the geniculate to the amygdala mediate such conditioned responses. Cortical neuron responses are also changed by conditioning for example, the pairing of an acoustic stimulus with a noxious stimulus greatly alters the response of cortical neurons. Such observations indicate that responses at these high levels of the auditory pathway are context dependent.A fundamental feature of cortical organization is the cortical column, which is oriented normal to the cortical surface and runs across all six of the cortical layers. In the cortex, neurons within a column tend to have similar response characteristics. For instance, in the auditory cortex, neurons within a given column generally have similar CFs. Neurons also tend to have similar types of responses to binaural sounds these binaural interaction characteristics are tested in preparations in which each ear is stimulated with a separate sound source. Usually one ear, the main ear, excites a cortical neuron most often this ear is the contralateral ear. The effect of the opposite ear can be either to excite by itself or to facilitate the main ear response of the neuron, or to inhibit by itself or to suppress the main ear response. Typically, either summation interactions or suppression interactions are found for neurons within a column. For the high-CF part of AI, summation and suppression columns show some organization, although not nearly as ideal as a checkerboard pattern with CF on one axis and summationsuppression interaction on the perpendicular axis.The binaural interaction classifi cation is useful, but oversimplifi ed, as some neurons can show both summation and suppression, depending on factors such as sound level. However, one fi nding that supports summationsuppression columns as an organizational plan is the pattern of projections from a column in one hemisphere to the opposite cortical hemisphere. Neurons within a summation column tend to have large projections to the opposite hemisphere. Suppression columns tend to have few projections. These fi ndings support binaural interaction characteristics as an important property of cortical columns.Physiological studies suggest a role for cortical fi eld AI in sound localization. In AI, many neurons are sensitive to interaural time and level differences, much as for neurons at lower stages of the pathway. When tested with a sound source in space, the response of many neurons depends on the azimuth of the source. As expected from the fact that auditory pathways are predominantly crossed, a large number of cortical neurons respond to sound sources centered on the contralateral side. The receptive fi elds for many neurons occupy much of the azimuth on the contralat-eral side and some have even wider fi elds that encompass both sides. Other neurons, however, have receptive fi elds that are very narrow. Units within a given column tend to have receptive fi elds that are similar, probably because of the similar binaural interaction characteristics within a column. It is easy to imagine that neurons with summation characteristics would tend to have receptive fi elds that would be large and encompass both contralateral and ipsilateral sides because of their bilateral excitatory input. Units with suppression characteristics, however, would tend to have narrower fi elds located mainly on one side because they receive inhibitory input from the other side. Finally, the auditory cortex has not yet been shown to have an organized space map of a sounds position in external space onto a dimension within the cortex.Behavioral studies also indicate a strong role of AI in sound localization Animals emit a variety of vocal signals. These signals make possible a wide range of behaviors, including communication and even echolocation in bats. Are there specifi c "call detectors" in the auditory cortices of these animals This area is relatively unexplored however, available evidence suggests that this type of detector may exist only rarely and that the response to vocalizations is probably represented by spatially dispersed, synchronized assemblies of cortical neurons rather than by individual neurons. However, cortical neurons do show selectivity to complex sounds such as noise bands and speciesspecifi c calls over what would be predicted from their pure tone frequency selectivity A number of studies using lesions of the auditory cortex indicate a strong role of the cortex in processing complex acoustic signals. After bilateral lesions of the auditory cortex, experimental animals cannot discriminate between different temporal patterns of sounds, such as a sequence in which the sound frequency pattern is a repeated "low-high-low" and a sequence in which the pattern is a repeated "high-low-high." In primates, lesions of the cortex impair discrimination of species-specifi c vocalizations. This impairment is more pronounced after lesion of the left cortex, indicating lateralization of processing of these vocalizations at the cortical level. Human speech is an especially complex acoustical signal its intelligibility and production can be decreased greatly by a stroke that creates a lesion of the cortex in humans. Although there is great variability in the extent and effect of such lesions, language processing is most interrupted by lesions of perisylvian cortex regions, especially in Wernickes area and Brocas area. Wernickes area is especially close to auditory cortex and can be considered an auditory association area. Lesions lateralized in the left hemisphere in righthanded individuals are most disruptive of speech comprehension and production. The lateralization of language processing in one hemisphere is a unique fi nding of asymmetry in brain function, very different from the apparent symmetry of subcortical nuclei and primary auditory cortical fi elds.Imaging studies in normal subjects suggest acoustic stimuli such as noise and modulated tones activate primary auditory cortical fi elds, but do not activate surrounding areas. These surrounding areas, including Wernickes and Brocas areas, can be activated by speech stimuli. Furthermore, the activation by speech stimuli usually is lateralized to the left hemisphere of right-handed individuals. Taken together, the lesion and imaging studies suggest a hierarchical pattern of cortical activation with simple stimuli being processed in the primary cortical fi elds and more complex stimuli, such as speech, processed in association areas that are lateralized in one hemisphere. Further imaging studies will be very useful in showing more specifi cally the functions of the auditory areas in the cortex.Bats offer unique opportunities for researchers studying the auditory system. Echolocating bats emit high-frequency pulses of sound and use the return echoes to locate and capture their fl ying insect prey. These pulses are above the upper frequency limit of human hearing. They were discovered in the 1940s by Donald Griffi n, who was then an undergraduate student at Harvard University. The echolocation performance of the bat is impressive: bats are adept enough to fi nd a mosquito above a golf course at night. Indeed, Griffi n demonstrated that bats can avoid wires as thin as 0.3 mm diameter while fl ying in a darkened room.There are more than 800 species of echolocating bats, all within the suborder Microchiroptera. One of the beststudied bats is the mustached bat, Pteronotus parnellii. It emits echolocating pulses that have an initial part of constant frequency, followed by a part of decreasing frequency. This bat is thus called a CF-FM bat The echo can also be changed in frequency, or Dopplershifted, because the bat is moving relative to the refl ecting surface. Bats that are moving toward a refl ecting surface will have an echo that is Doppler-shifted toward higher frequency. Most background surfaces will be Doppler shifted about the same. However, targets that are moving differently from the background will generate different Doppler shifts. For instance, a moth with moving wings will refl ect an echo with a moving Doppler shift that is quite different from the stationary background. Such differences are presumably used by the CF-FM bat to locate moving targets. Insects are not always passive in the face of such predatory behavior. For instance, some moths have good ultrasonic hearing and take evasive fl ight maneuvers when exposed to a bats pulse.Research on the auditory system of bats has been greatly aided by knowledge of the "relevant" stimulus, since much of the time the bat hears an emitted pulse followed a short time later by an echo. Pioneering work by Reference Am. June: 60-68.Much about the central auditory pathways remains to be explored. Although these pathways are mapped tonotopically, whether there are other mappings in orthogonal dimensions is unknown. Much current research is focused on the plasticity of central auditory responses with auditory experience and after hearing loss and whether this plasticity is generally present at the many subcortical auditory centers. The fact that there are descending systems at many levels of the pathways is known, but research is necessary to show how these systems alter the processing of auditory information. Finally, the medial geniculate and auditory cortex are likely to play a role in sound localization, but the specifi cs of this role and their functions in many of the other hearing processes remain to be discovered. Like many echolocating bats, this bat has an enlarged nose leaf that probably focuses the echolocating pulse ahead. Also like many echolocating bats, this bat has enlarged external ears that make the bat more sensitive to echoes coming from ahead. From Griffi n. Schematic of emitted pulse and returned echo of the mustached bat, Pteronotus parnellii. The emitted pulse consists of four harmonics, the strongest of which is H 2 at about 60 kHz. Each harmonic has an initial part of constant frequency and a later part of changing frequency. The echoes are returned after a travel time that causes a delay relative to the pulse. Additionally, if the target is moving relative to the bat, the echo is returned with a Doppler shift in frequency. Dorsolateral view of the auditory cortex of the mustached bat showing several of the areas specialized for processing the echolocation signals. The primary auditory cortex, AI, is delineated by a red line and its isofrequency contours are indicated in kHz. It contains a region called the Doppler-shifted CF region, which is a greatly expanded region devoted to the most prominent component of the Doppler-shifted echo. Other shaded regions contain neurons that are combination sensitive and respond to combinations of the pulse and echo, often at certain delays. Neurons that respond to pulseecho CF portions are in the CFCF region. Those that respond to pulseecho FM portions are in the FMFM region. From Vision is the most studied and perhaps the best understood topic in sensory neuroscience. This chapter is concerned primarily with vision in mammals and focuses on the pathway in the visual system that has to do with perception: from the retina to the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus and on to the multiple areas of visual cortex. Other regions of the brain that receive visual input are dealt with briefl y in this chapter and more extensively in the chapter on eye movements.Studying vision provides the opportunity to explore the brain at many different levels, from the physical and biochemical mechanisms of phototransduction to the boundary between psychology and physiology. At each of these levels, the visual system has evolved to solve a number of diffi cult problems. In terms of the physical stimulus, vision operates over extremely wide ranges of illumination. The visual system detects single photons in the dark but can also see clearly in bright sunlight, when the retina is bombarded with over 10 14 photons per second. At a much higher level of complexity, ensembles of neurons in the cerebral cortex are able to solve extremely diffi cult problems, such as extracting the three-dimensional motion of an object from two-dimensional retinal images.At every moment, the visual system is confronted with the vast amount of information present in visual scenes. The complex circuitry of the retina has evolved so that much of this information is extensively processed and relayed to the rest of the central nervous system, both effi ciently and with great fi delity. Vision, however, has not evolved to treat all of this information equally instead, it appears to be best suited to extract the sort of information that may be useful to animals, including humans, in a natural environment. Vision allows animals to navigate in the world to judge the speed and distance of objects and to identify food, members of other species, and familiar or unfamiliar members of the same species.In many animals, primates in particular, more of the brain is devoted to vision than to any other sensory function. This is perhaps because of the extreme complexity of the task required of vision: to classify and to interpret the wide range of visual stimuli in the physical world. At the highest levels of processing, the cerebral cortex extracts from the world the diverse qualities experienced as visual perception: from motion, color, texture, and depth to the grouping of objects, defi ned by the combination of simple features.The strategies that the brain uses to solve the problems of vision can be understood at a very intuitive level. The most useful concept to aid this intuition is that of the receptive fi eld, which is the cornerstone of visual physiology. As defi ned by H. K. Hartline in 1938 In the 1930s and 1940s, Hartline developed the concept of the receptive fi eld with studies of the axons of individual neurons that project from the lateral eye of the horseshoe crab and from the frogs eye Lateral inhibition represents the classic example of a general principle: most neurons in sensory systems are best adapted for detecting changes in the external environment. This principle can be explained in behavioral terms. As a rule, it is change that has the greatest signifi cance for an animal, for example, the edge of an extended object or a static object beginning to move. This principle can also be explained in terms of information processing. Given a world that is fi lled with constants-with uniform objects, with objects that move only rarely-it is most effi cient to respond only to changes.Several types of visual responses can be discussed in terms of the detection of change, or of contrastdefi ned as the fractional difference in luminance between two stimuli. There are several forms of contrast. The fi rst is spatial contrast, the detection of which is enhanced by neurons in the retina that have lateral inhibition. Next, there is temporal contrast, or change over time. Starting in the retina, visual neurons are affected very little by slow changes in illumination, but are extremely sensitive to more rapid changes. Finally, there is motion, which is distinguished by characteristic changes in a stimulus over both space and time. Many neurons in the visual system are excited selectively by objects that have a certain rate or direction of motion. In summary, contrast sensitivity can take on at least three forms: sensitivity to spatial variations in a stimulus, sensitivity to changes over time, and sensitivity to changes in both space and time.From the photoreceptors to the multiple visual cortical areas, the visual system is hierarchical. One level provides input to the next in a feedforward progression, although lateral interactions and feedback are almost always present as well. As a general rule, receptive fi elds at successive stages of processing encode increasingly high-level features of the visual stimulus. The outer segment of a photoreceptor, which contains the visual pigment, is infl uenced only by a small point in visual space. It is therefore almost entirely insensitive to the spatial structure of a stimulus. At the opposite extreme, neurons in the inferior parietal region of visual cortex seem to respond best when the animal is viewing a specifi c face.These two extremes of visual responses illustrate the visual systems dual task: to maintain generalitythe ability to respond to any stimulus-while being able to represent specifi c, environmentally important classes of stimuli. High-level neurons classify visual stimuli by integrating information that is present in the earlier stages of processing, but also by ignoring information that is independent of that classifi cation. For instance, motion-sensitive neurons in area MT of the cerebral cortex are exquisitely sensitive to the direction and rate of motion of an object, but very poor at distinguishing the objects color or its position. This lack of localization is quite common in high-level neurons: receptive fi elds become larger as the features they represent become increasingly complex. Thus, for instance, neurons that respond to faces typically have receptive fi elds that cover most of visual space. For these cells, large receptive fi elds have a distinct advantage: the preferred stimulus can be identifi ed no matter where it is located on the retina.The mammalian visual system is a complex, hierarchical system that can be studied from a number of different viewpoints. This chapter concentrates on the physiology of visual neurons, which is based on the study of receptive fi elds. Originally, receptive fi elds were defi ned as the area of the retina that could evoke responses in a visual neuron. The concept has evolved to include the stimulus attributes that lead to a neural response, such as color, motion, or even the complex features of a specifi c physical object. Within the hierarchy of the visual system-from retina to the multiple areas of the visual cortexneurons are selective for increasingly complex or high-order features.The study of vision begins with the eye The classic experiments that Kuffl er performed on retinal ganglion cells have formed the foundations for much of the subsequent physiological analysis of the mammalian visual system. Even beyond the study of vision, they represent a model for understanding the neurobiology of sensory systems. These experiments were performed in vivo in anesthetized cats. The fi rst step in this sort of experiment is the careful placement of a fi ne micro-electrode close to a single neuron so that action potentials can be recorded extracellularly. An oscilloscope trace of the fi ring pattern of this neuron is important, but the sound of action potentials on an audio monitor is even more critical. This immediate feedback allows the researcher to search for visual stimuli that excite or inhibit the neuron. Kuffl ers fi rst fi nding was that there were two categories of ganglion cells, as Hartline had seen in the retina of the frog. The cells were either on, i.e., excited by light increment, or off, i.e., excited by light decrement.One of Kuffl ers most important contributions was the careful mapping of lateral interactions in the retina, or what he termed the center-surround structure of the receptive fi eld. When an on ganglion cell was being studied, a small light spot placed in the center of its receptive fi eld would cause an immediate increase in fi ring rate of the cell Kuffl ers early experiments, along with those of Hartline, established the technical and conceptual foundations for the fi eld of visual physiology. Almost all subsequent work in this fi eld can be seen as falling into the three broad categories of experiments, exemplifi ed by Kuffl ers 1953 study: the mapping of responses with isolated, suboptimal stimuli, the search for an optimal stimulus, and the study of interactions between responses evoked by two or more stimuli.27. VISION IV. SENSORY SYSTEMS fl atten the lens when they relax, thus bringing more distant objects into focus. The amount of light that reaches the retina is controlled by the iris, whose aperture is the pupil. The iris, which is situated between the cornea and the lens in the anterior chamber of the eye, contracts at high light levels and expands in the dark.The anatomy of the retina has an almost crystalline beauty, a beauty that is enhanced by the clear relationships between form and function The retina is one of the few circuits in the nervous system simple enough that cell types and connections can be learned without great effort. This is made even easier since the role of each of the fi ve cell types can be placed within a simple functional scheme. The two main attributes of the output of the retina-the pointto-point representation of the visual image and the spatially antagonistic center-surround interactions in the receptive fi eld-can be understood in terms of the anatomy. The direct pathway, photoreceptor  bipolar cell  ganglion cell, is the substrate for the center of the receptive fi eld of the ganglion cell and thus for its spatial resolution. Lateral interactions in the retina, most notably the center-surround antagonism, or lateral inhibition, are mediated by horizontal cells and amacrine cells.The two major types of photoreceptors in the vertebrate eye are the rods and cones Rods and cones work together to allow the visual system to operate over a wide range of luminance conditions. Under scotopic conditions when luminance levels are very low, only the rods are active. As luminance levels increase to mesopic conditions, both the rods and cones contribute to vision. As luminance levels increase further yet, to scotopic condition, rod responses saturate and only the cones contribute to vision. Because the center of our retina contains very few, if any rods, we have a foveal blind spot under very dim conditions. Consequently, a dim star will disappear when we move our eyes to look at it directly.Phototransduction occurs when photons of light are absorbed by photopigments located in the outer segments of photoreceptors. Photopigments have an organic, light-absorbing component and a protein component. The opsin determines the wavelength specifi city of the photopigment and has the ability to interact with G proteins. Rods contain a single photopigment, rhodopsin, whereas cones contain one of three cone opsins. Once a photon is absorbed, a cascade of events occurs that ultimately affects the membrane potential of the photoreceptor. This cascade begins with the activation of the G protein that then activates a phosphodiesterase that hydrolyzes cGMP and reduces the intracellular concentration of cGMP. Because the outer membrane of a photoreceptor contains many cGMP-gated cation channels, a decrease in the intracellular concentration of cGMP will cause the photoreceptor to hyperpolarize. In this way, light increments lead to hyperpolarization and a reduction in neurotransmitter release, whereas light decrements lead to depolarization and an increase in transmitter release. Importantly, photoreceptors do not produce action potentials, but rather have graded potentials that are modulated around a mean level.Similar to photoreceptors, bipolar cells generate graded potentials rather than action potentials. Bipolar cells are divided into two broad classes, termed on and off bipolars, that respond to light stimuli with depolarization and hyperpolarization, respectively. On bipolars are also known as invaginating bipolars, and off bipolars are known as fl at bipolars because of the shape of the synaptic contacts they receive from photoreceptors The functional importance of the on and the off pathways can best be understood in terms of contrast. From the bipolar cells onward, visual neurons respond best to spatial and temporal contrast rather than to absolute light levels. Objects in the world are visible by the light they refl ect their borders are discerned usually because of different degrees of refl ectance, which leads to contrast. Because the visual system is adapted for seeing objects that can be either brighter or darker than their backgrounds, it is not too surprising that it is equally sensitive to positive and negative contrast steps.Most ganglion cells, the output cells of the retina, receive their main excitatory input from bipolar cells. Thus these ganglion cells also have either on or off responses in the center of their receptive fi elds, according to which class of bipolar cells provide their input. Other ganglion cells, known as on-off cells, respond to both light onset and to light offset. These latter cells receive input from both classes of bipolar cells. Many of these cells respond preferentially to stimuli moving in a particular direction of motion.There is a complex three-way synaptic relationship among the terminals of the photoreceptors, the processes of horizontal cells, and the dendrites of bipolar cells The second family of lateral interneurons in the retina, the amacrine cells, is a diverse class of cells that exhibits a wide range of morphologies. As is true of horizontal cells, all processing takes place on the dendrites of amacrine cells, which contain both pre-and postsynaptic elements Visual information leaves the eye via the optic nerve, which is composed of the axons of all the different classes of ganglion cells. The optic nerve begins at the optic disc This chapter is concerned primarily with the classes of retinal ganglion cells that project to LGN neurons, which in turn project to the primary visual cortex. Although cells in the LGN are more than mere relays of information from the retina, their receptive fi elds are quite similar to those of their ganglion cell inputs. The following discussion of retinal receptive fi elds, therefore, can serve equally well to describe receptive fi elds in the LGN.Kuffl er found that retinal ganglion cells in the cat have a stereotyped center-surround organization. Similar cells were found at every position across the entire retina. Researchers later discovered, however, that there are in fact several different functional classes of ganglion cells, each with distinct response properties. Although different cell classes have been found in different species, in none is the retina composed of a single mosaic of identical cells. The fact that there are multiple types of output from the retina has had a profound effect on the study of visual processing in the brain. The degree to which these parallel pathways Stimuli used by Enroth-Cugell and Robson, and in many studies that followed theirs, consisted of gratings: light and dark bands whose luminance varied in a sinusoidal fashion across a screen. Gratings were not designed to be the most effective stimuli for visual neurons. The broad goal of this sort of experiment is to study not just what makes neurons respond best, but to study how they would respond to any stimulus and to probe what mechanisms they use to produce these responses. The analytical framework that goes along with these experiments is called systems theory, the study of input-output systems. Linear systems, those that simply add up all their inputs to produce an output, constitute an important part of this theory.Enroth-Cugell and Robson used a simple test of linearity in their study of retinal ganglion cells in the cat.A grating was presented at different positions, and the responses to its introduction and removal were recorded. Two questions were addressed for each cell studied: If a certain phase One class of ganglion cells, called X cells, passed these tests for linear spatial summation The use of systems theory and quantitative techniques in the study of the visual system has had a number of notable successes. It has helped in the classifi cation of different families of visual neurons, such as X and Y cells. Further, it has been used to elucidate some of the mechanisms responsible for the responses of visual neurons. Perhaps most importantly, along with a large body psychophysical experiments that employ the same stimuli, it has helped create a common framework in which the responses of neurons can be related to perception.27. VISION IV. SENSORY SYSTEMS In one of the earlier studies using a quantitative approach to receptive fi eld mapping, Primates have a number of different classes of retinal ganglion cells, each with distinct cellular morphology, projection patterns, and visual response properties. This discussion focuses on ganglion cells that project to the lateral geniculate nucleus. There are many differences among primate species this section concentrates on the macaque a diurnal, Old World primate. The macaque visual system has been studied extensively with anatomical, physiological, and behavioral methods. Most importantly, macaque vision is very similar to human vision.The most numerous class of ganglion cells in the macaque retina are sometimes referred to as P cells, so-called because they project to the dorsal-most layers of the LGN, the parvocellular layers The genetics of red-green defects have long been known to be X-linked: they are inherited from the mother and are fairly common in men, but they are uncommon in women. Roughly 2% of European white males are protanopes or deuteranopes and, depending on the population, between 2 and 6% are trichromats with a single anomalous pigment. In contrast, only 0.4% of women in similar populations have red-green defects. Tritanopia, found equally in men and women, is significantly rarer. It is inherited as an autosomal-dominant trait thought to occur at low frequencies, estimated variously between 1 in 500 and 1 in over 10,000.Because of the overlap in cone pigments, inherited color vision defects are not as simple as terms such as "red blindness" might suggest. In broad terms, protanopes and deuteranopes are unable to make specifi c discriminations along the red-green axis. Depending on the defect, they are unable to distinguish certain reds and greens from gray or from each other. Tritanopes are unable to discriminate between colors with and without a short wavelength component, such as between gray and certain shades of violet or yellow.In the 1980s, Nathans, Hogness, and colleagues cloned and sequenced the three cone pigment genes and related them to color defects in humans. The cloning strategy was based on the pigments predicted close homology to rhodopsin Although the inherited color defi ciencies are fairly simple and well understood, acquired defects in color vision-found in a number of ocular, neurological, and systemic diseases-are far more varied. One such syndrome, cerebral achromatopsia, was described in the neurological literature in the 1880s. In rare patients with certain cortical lesions, the discrimination of colors and the naming of colors were severely impaired. In the majority of cases, there were other associated defi citseither an area of complete blindness or an inability to recognize faces-but in some cases, vision was otherwise quite normal. From the location of the lesions, some neurologists early on inferred the existence of a region of cortex required for color, vision, near the inferior border of the primary visual cortex.The literature of cerebral achromatopsia, quite developed in the late nineteenth century, fell into eclipse for the fi rst half of the twentieth century when highly specifi c functional divisions of the cortex were questioned. With the discovery in the 1970s of multiple visual areas in primate cerebral cortex Unlike directionally selective ganglion cells, which signal that motion is present somewhere within a large region, directionally selective simple cells in the visual cortex maintain detailed spatial information as well. A moving stimulus, such as a light bar moving to the left For directionally selective simple cells, the timing of the response is directly related to the position of the stimulus. In the illustration, the cell is sensitive to a bright bar at a range of positions, but the timing of the peak response changes with position. These responses to fl ashed bars explain the responses to moving stimuli. Just as on-centeroff-surround ganglion cells respond best to a bright spot on a dark background A third kind of directionally selective cell is found in cortical area MT of the macaque. Receptive fi elds of individual neurons in MT integrate motion information over large regions of visual space. By comparison, receptive fi elds in the retina, LGN, and V1 can be thought of as viewing the world through much smaller apertures. If the goal of vision is to extract the properties of objects, rather than isolated features, then the existence of small receptive fi elds can lead to what is known as the aperture problem. As illustrated in As noted earlier, the receptive fi eld properties of the LGN relay cells match closely those of their retinal afferents, but the two parallel pathways, P  parvocellular and M  magnocellular, are quite different. Five main characteristics distinguish the responses of P cells and M cells:1. P cell receptive fi elds are smaller than M cell receptive fi elds at the same retinal position. 2. M cell axons conduct impulses faster than P cell axons. 3. The responses of P cells to a prolonged visual stimulus, particularly a color stimulus, can be very sustained, whereas M cells tend to respond more transiently. 4. Most P cells are sensitive to the color of a stimulus M cells are not. 5. M cells are much more sensitive than P cells to low-contrast, black-and-white stimuli These last two differences, which have strong implications for the functional role of these pathways, are discussed next.Color vision depends on the distinct sensitivities of the three classes of cone photoreceptors to different wavelengths of light. Although fi ne distinctions can be made between different wavelengths, it is important to emphasize that each of the light-sensitive pigments in the three cone classes is sensitive to a broad range of wavelengths. The spectral sensitivities of these pigments overlap considerably Because green light will excite both long and middle wavelength cones, the color green can be distinguished only by the fact that it excites middle wavelength cones more strongly than it excites long wavelength cones. This distinction can be made by neurons that are sensitive to the difference between the signals from two cone classes, or neurons that are color opponent. In the retina and LGN, there are two categories of coloropponent cells: red-green and blue-yellow Near the fovea, the center of the retina, a P cell receives input from only one bipolar cell. This midget bipolar in turn receives input from a single cone There are four different types of red-green opponent P cells in the retina Because of their marked color sensitivity and small receptive fi elds, P cells have long been thought to be involved with the ability to make color discriminations and to see the fi nest details. When tested with blackand-white stimuli, however, P cells responded to low contrast very poorly compared to M cells. In a study that used the quantitative methodology similar  to Enroth-Cugell and Robsons, The relatively poor sensitivity of P cells to lowcontrast stimuli is not well understood, but it may be partially the result of two factors: receptive-fi eld centers receive input from a very small region of the retina, and the inputs from different cone classes are subtracted from each other, rather than added together. Whatever the reason, the poor performance of the P pathway in detecting low contrast implies an important role for M cells in the detection of the form of objects, in addition to their role in the motion pathway.The retina, part of the central nervous system, is a self-contained neuronal circuit whose anatomy and physiology have been studied in great detail. There are fi ve types of cells in the retina. Photoreceptors, bipolar cells, and ganglion cells constitute the direct, feedforward pathway. Horizontal cells and amacrine cells subserve lateral interactions within the retina. Photoreceptors are all hyperpolarized by light, but bipolar cells can be either hyperpolarized or depolarized by light. There is a great variety of retinal ganglion cells, but most have an antagonistic centersurround organization. In the primate, the two best studied classes of ganglion cells are P cells and M cells, which project to the parvocellular and magnocellular layers of the LGN, respectively. P cells have small receptive fi elds, are sensitive to the color of a stimulus, and are relatively insensitive to low contrasts. M cells have larger receptive fi elds, are insensitive to color, and are very sensitive to low contrasts.In mammals with forward-facing eyes, such as most carnivores and the primates, retinal axons are routed so that visual information from the same points in space coming from the two eyes can be combined. From both eyes, ganglion cells whose receptive fi elds are in one half of the visual fi eld project to the opposite cerebral hemisphere In the cat, the LGN has only two principal layers, called A and A1, which receive input from the contralateral and ipsilateral retinas, respectively. The neurons are again quite similar to either the retinal X cells or the Y cells that innervate them.Cat primary visual cortex is perhaps the best understood neocortical area in any species. The fi rst studies of The six-layered LGN of the macaque monkey. The top four parvocellular layers receive input from the ipsilateral and contralateral eye in the order of contra, ipsi, contra, and ipsi. The bottom two magnocellular layers receive ipsi and contra input, respectively. In between these principal layers are intercalated or koniocellular layers. The arrow from layer 6 to 1 indicates organization of the precisely aligned retinotopic maps of the six layers. The receptive fi elds of neurons found along this line are located at the same position in visual space. From As they leave the optic chiasm, retinal axons from the two eyes travel together in the optic tract, which terminates in the LGN Hubel and Wiesel described two broad classes of neurons in area 17: simple cells and complex cells. The receptive fi elds of simple cells were segmented into oriented on-and-off subregions and were therefore most sensitive to similarly oriented stimuli. In these receptive fi eld subregions, responses were evoked by turning a light stimulus on or off, but not by both. Given these well-defi ned on-and-off subregions in simple cells, Hubel and Wiesel suggested a straightforward hierarchical model to explain orientation selectivity: neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus whose receptive fi elds are arranged in a row could all converge to excite a specifi c simple cell The second class of cortical neurons, complex cells, also responded best to oriented stimuli, but their receptive fi elds were not elongated along a preferred orientation, nor were they divided into distinct on-and-off subregions. It would therefore be diffi cult to imagine how the responses of these neurons could be constructed directly from the centersurround receptive fi elds in the thalamus. Given the properties of simple cells, Hubel and Wiesel proposed a hierarchical scheme. Complex cells receive their orientation selectivity from convergent input from simple cells whose receptive fi elds have the same orientation preference, but have slightly different spatial locations This original model is hierarchical or serial information fl ows from one level to the next in a welldefi ned series. In contrast to this hierarchical model of cortical processing, it also has been proposed that each region of the cerebral cortex is made up of several different streams of information that are all processed in parallel. As with most dichotomies, elements of both hierarchical and parallel processing have been found in the visual cortex of all mammals studied. For simplicity, an outline of the organization of visual cortex in the cat is discussed here in terms of a hierarchical model. Parallel processing will be illustrated with the example of a primate visual cortex.The hierarchical scheme has received support from several correlations between anatomy and physiology of area 17. In broad terms, simple cells are more common in the layers of cortex that receive direct input from the thalamus. Complex cells are found more frequently in layers that are more distant from the thalamic input in layers 2  3, which receive input primarily from layer 4, and in layer 5, which receives most of its input from layers 2  3 In information about orientation to later stages of processing, but that information has been combined and generalized. A simple cell responds to an oriented stimulus of a specifi c confi guration and a specifi c location in particular, it has separate on-and-off subregions. A complex cell also responds to stimuli at one orientation, but the receptive fi eld is not segregated into onand-off subregions. Instead, it can respond to a light or dark stimulus of the correct orientation, independent of the exact location of the stimulus within the receptive fi eld. This sort of generalization is a recurrent theme in the cortical processing of visual information.In the macaque primary visual cortex, a hierarchical organization is certainly present, but it is also clearly composed of several parallel streams. As discussed earlier, at least three types of inputs to visual cortex are fi rst segregated within the LGN. Each class of neurons projects to a specifi c subdivision of primary visual cortex. Most thalamic afferents terminate in layer 4C, which is split into two divisions. 4Ca receives its input from magnocellular neurons and 4C3 from parvocellular neurons. Intercalated, or koniocellular, geniculate neurons project to layers 2  3, specifi cally to regions known as "blobs" that stain densely for the enzyme cytochrome oxidase So far, the physiology of the visual cortex has been considered in terms of individual neurons and their response properties. Another major contribution of Hubel and Wiesel was their demonstration that cells with similar receptive fi eld properties tend to be found near each other in the cortex. Further, they found that physiological response properties, such as orientation selectivity, are organized in an orderly fashion across the cortical surface. They termed the relationship between anatomy and physiology the functional architecture of visual cortex.Hubel and Wiesels key observation in this arena was that when an electrode is advanced through the cortex perpendicular to its surface, all neurons encountered have similar response properties. If a cell near the surface has a specifi c orientation and is dominated by input from one eye, then cells below it share these preferences. This fi nding is consistent with the idea, proposed by Lorente de N, that the fundamental unit in cortical architecture is a vertically oriented column of neurons. Hubel and Wiesel proposed that a cortical column is both a physiological and an anatomical unit, as had Mountcastle in his study of somatosensory cortex. A second observation was that the property of orientation preference varies smoothly over the cortical surface. If an electrode takes a tangential path through the cortex through many different columns, the orientation preference generally changes in a steady clockwise or counterclockwise progression, although occasionally there are discontinuous jumps In addition to orientation, at least two other parameters are mapped smoothly across the cortical surface. Cells in the visual cortex receive inputs from the two eyes in varying proportion, a property that Hubel and Wiesel termed ocular dominance. In tangential microelectrode penetrations, cells are found that are dominated fi rst by input from one eye and then the other. This provides evidence for ocular dominance columns, which have subsequently been demonstrated anatomically as well as physiologically. Second, prior to Hubel and Wiesels work, a precise map of visual space across the surface of the cortex had been demonstrated. For any cortical column, receptive fi elds are all located at roughly the same position on the retina. Nearby columns represent nearby points in visual space in a precise and orderly arrangement. The position of a stimulus on the retina is termed its retinotopy thus a region of the brain that maintains the relations between adjacent retinal regions is said to have a retinotopic map.Given the existence of multiple functional maps, the obvious question is: How do these maps relate to each other This question has been answered most defi nitively for the relationship between retinotopy and ocular dominance. Layer 4 in the primate is ideal for studying this question, as the receptive fi elds are quite small and the borders between ocular dominance columns are well defi ned. By making long, tangential penetrations through layer 4 of the striate cortex, Hubel and Wiesel found a precise interdigitating map from each eye. When eye dominance shifts, the receptive fi eld location shifts to a point corresponding to the middle of the previous ocular dominance column IV. SENSORY SYSTEMS locations represented by adjacent ocular dominance columns. In this manner, a complete representation of space is attained for both eyes while ensuring that cells that respond to overlapping points in visual space are always nearby within the cortex.The technique of optical imaging has proven extremely useful in the study of the functional architecture of the visual cortex. Optical imaging allows direct visualization of the relative activity of small cortical ensembles rather than relying on inferences made from single-unit studies A typical optical imaging experiment works as follows In the primate, there is a fourth feature of the functional architecture of visual cortex in addition to retinotopy, orientation, and ocular dominance columns.When stained for the enzyme cytochrome oxidase, histological sections of V1 revealed a regular pattern of patches, or blobs In V2, the second visual area in the cerebral cortex, cytochrome oxidase staining reveals regions of high and low activity arranged in parallel stripes One of the reasons it is important to understand the anatomical relationship between V1 and V2 is that neurons in the thick, thin and pale stripes of V2 give rise to projections that appear selective for either the dorsal or ventral streams of visual processing in extrastriate cortex, whereby neurons in the thick stripes provide input to the dorsal stream and neurons in the thin and pale stripes provide input to the ventral stream.In early studies of the cytoarchitecture of cerebral cortex, the visual cortex was divided into three areas according to Brodmanns classifi cation: areas 17, 18, and 19. These divisions were based on differences in cell cytoarchitecture, or differences in the size, morphology, and distributions of cells within the six cortical laminae. Area 17 is primary visual cortex, or striate cortex, so named because of a heavily myelinated sublamina within layer 4, prominently visible as a stripe in transverse section. Areas 18 and 19 were known simply as the visual association cortex. An assumption behind these designations was that areas defi ned by anatomical criteria would ultimately prove to be functionally specialized.The demonstration of multiple visual cortical areas has been one of the important discoveries of the past  A vast expanse of cerebral cortex-greater than 50% of the total in many primate species-is involved primarily or exclusively in the processing of visual information. The extrastriate cortex now includes areas 18 and 19, as well as large regions of the temporal and parietal lobes As a testament to the increasing complexity of the fi eld, the naming of visual areas The dual themes of parallel and hierarchical processing are central to the understanding of the extrastriate cortex. Physiological studies of cortical areas revealed profound differences between them, and a series of studies by The ventral stream, V1  V2  V3  V4  IT . . . , is discussed in Chapter 55. This chapter considers only the dorsal stream, V1  V2  MT  MST. . . . The dorsal stream is dominated by magnocellular cells and the ventral stream by parvocellular cells, although the segregation is far from strict MT, or V5, is perhaps the best understood of the extrastriate visual areas. It has held particular interest ever since its was discovered in 1971 The range of stimuli that a given MT neuron can respond to is impressively broad-the attributes, or form cues, that defi ne a fi gure can be luminance, texture, or relative motion-but the preferred direction and speed are always the same for that neuron IV. SENSORY SYSTEMS system are sensitive to isolated and specifi c features in visual scenes. Higher visual areas respond to very specifi c attributes, but these attributes are increasingly remote from the physical stimulus. Instead, they represent increasingly complex concepts, such the motion of an extended object or the identity of a face.The lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus is a layered structure that receives segregated input from the two eyes and projects to the primary visual cortex. Geniculate neurons have center-surround receptive fi elds that are similar to those of their retinal inputs. In contrast, most neurons in the primary visual cortex are sensitive to the orientation of a stimulus. In mammalian species, there are elements of both hierarchical and parallel processing in the primary visual cortex. This section has emphasized that the visual cortical circuit in the cat can be seen as a functional hierarchy that transforms geniculate input into simple and then complex receptive fi elds. In the macaque monkey the focus has been on the parallel pathways that are kept relatively separate in the striate and extrastriate cortex.The visual cortex has an orderly functional architecture. Neurons within a cortical column have similar receptive fi eld attributes, such as orientation selectivity, ocular dominance, and receptive fi eld location. Each of these receptive fi eld attributes varies smoothly over the cortical surface. The organization of ocular dominance columns and orientation columns across the cortical surface can be visualized with optical imaging.Finally, in the macaque monkey, there are more than 30 extrastriate visual cortical regions, each of which performs different functions. These extrastriate regions can be divided into two pathways: the ventral stream, devoted to form recognition, and the dorsal stream, devoted to action or to spatial tasks. Areas in each stream form a functional and anatomical hierarchy. Neurons in successive visual areas respond to increasingly high-order or abstract features of the visual world."All mankind can do is to move things . . . whether whispering a syllable or felling a forest."-Sherrington This brief quote is a reminder of the basic fact that all interactions with the surrounding world are through the actions of the motor system. When a human baby is born it is a sweet but very immature survival machine, with a limited behavioral repertoire. It is able to breathe and has searching and sucking refl exes so that it can be fed from the mothers breast. It can swallow, vomit and process food, and cry to call for attention if something is wrong. A baby also has a variety of protective refl exes that mediate coughing, sneezing, and touch avoidance. These different patterns of motor behavior are thus available at birth and are due to innate motor programs During roughly the fi rst 15 years of life the motor system continues to develop through maturation of neuronal circuitry and by learning through different motor activities. Playing represents an important element both in children and in young mammals such as kittens and pups. During the fi rst year of life the human infant matures progressively. It can balance its head at 2-3 months, is able to sit at around 6-7 months, and stand with support at approximately 9-12 months. The coordination of different types of posture, such as standing, is a complex motor task to master, with hundreds of different muscles taking part in a coordinated fashion. Sensory information contributes importantly, in particular from the vestibular apparatus, eyes, muscle, and skin receptors located at the soles of the feet. This development represents to a large degree a maturation process following a given sequence, but with individual variability among different children. When the postural system has evolved to a suffi cient degree, a child is able to start walking, which requires that the body posture be maintained while the points of support are changing by the alternating movements of the two legs. In common language the child is said to "learn" to walk, but in reality a progressive maturation of the nervous system is taking place. Identical twins start to walk essentially at the same time, even if one has been subjected to training and the other has not. At this point the motor pattern is still very immature. Proper walking coordination followed by running appears later, and the basic motor pattern actually continues to develop until puberty. The fi ne details of the motor pattern are adapted to the surrounding world, but also to modifi cation by will. The basic motor coordination underlying reaching and the fi ne control of hands and fi ngers undergo a similar characteristic maturation process over many years.The newborn human infant is comparatively immature, but other mammals, such as horses and deer, represent another extreme. The gnu, an African buffalolike antelope, needs to run away in order to survive attacks of predators such as lions. The young calf of the gnu can stand and run directly after birth and has been reported to be able to gallop ahead 10 minutes after delivery, tracking the running mother FIGURE 28.2 Some animals are comparatively mature when they are born. Ten minutes after the calf of the gnu, a buffalo-like antelope, is born it is able to track its mother in a gallop. This means that the postural and locomotor systems are suffi ciently mature to allow the young calf to generate these complex patterns of motor coordination at birth. There is thus little time to calibrate the motor system after birth and obviously no time for learning. Courtesy of Erik Tallmark. few weeks they leave the nest fl ying rather successfully, for the fi rst time in their life, and thus without any previous experience. In addition to the basic motor skills such as standing, walking, and chewing, humans also develop skilled motor coordination, allowing delicate hand and fi nger movements to be used in handwriting or playing an instrument or utilizing the air fl ow and shape of the oral cavity to produce sound as in speech or singing. The neural substrates allowing learning and execution of these complex motor sequences are expressed genetically and characteristic of our species. What is learned, however, such as which language one speaks or the type of letters one writes, is obviously a function of the cultural environment..Motoneurons are activated by interneurons of different motor programs or refl ex centers and by descending tracts from the forebrain and the brain stem. Thus motoneurons supplying different muscles can be activated with great precision by these different sources that together determine the degree of activation, as well as the exact timing of the motoneurons of a given muscle.Signals from sensory receptors are used by the motor system in a number of ways. Golgi tendon organs that sense the degree of contraction in a muscle and muscle spindles that signal the length of a muscle, as well as the speed of changes in length. Moreover, the sensitivity of muscle spindles can be regulated actively through a separate set of small motoneurons, referred to as g-motoneurons. These two muscle receptors have fast conducting afferent axons that provide rapid feedback to the spinal cord and take part in the autoregulation of the motor output to a given muscle. Fast muscle spindle afferents provide direct monosynaptic excitation to the a-motoneurons that control the muscle in which the muscle spindle is located. Thus, lengthening a muscle will lead to excitation of its motoneurons, counteracting the lengthening. This stretch refl ex thus involves negative feedback. This refl ex arc also provides the basis of the muscle contraction elicited by a brief tendon tap, which is used as a clinical test to investigate whether responsiveness of the motoneuronal pool is normal To summarize, the sensory contribution to motor control is very important in many different contexts. If sensory control is incapacitated, motor performance will in most cases be degraded. Without sensory information in different forms, movements can usually still be executed, but as a rule with much less perfection.If a perturbation occurs when an object is held in the hand, or when standing in a moving bus, it will be detected by different sensory receptors. This sensory signal will be fed back to the nervous system and be used to counteract the perturbation rapidly. This represents feedback control that is a correction of the actual perturbation after it has occurred. A limiting factor for the effi cacy of feedback control in biological systems is the delay involved. A sensory afferent signal must fi rst be elicited in the receptors concerned. It then has to be conducted to the central nervous system and be processed there to determine the proper response. The correction signal must subsequently be sent back to the appropriate muscle and make the muscle fi bers build up the contractile force required. In large animals, including humans, the delays involved can be substantial, and during fast movement sequences there may be little or no time for feedback corrections. In less demanding, more static situations, such as standing, sensory feedback is of critical importance.In many cases a perturbation is anticipated before it is initiated, and correction begins before it actually has occurred. This type of control often is called feed forward control, in contrast to feedback. Such anticipatory control mechanisms are often automatic and involuntary, and are part of an inherent control strategy. For example, when standing on two legs and planning to lift up one leg to stand on the other, the body position begins to shift over to the supporting leg before the other leg is lifted. The projection of the center of gravity will fall between the two feet initially and will have to shift over to a projection through the supporting limb. In most instances, movement commands are designed so that the corrections of body posture required for a stable movement occur before the particular movement has started, as when lifting a heavy object. If the converse situation occurred, and body position was corrected only after a perturbation had taken place, movements would become much less precise than with feed forward control. the stretch refl ex. In a muscle connected between two bones, the Golgi tendon organ is located at the transition between muscle and tendon. It senses any active tension produced by the muscle fi bers, being in series between muscle and tendon. The muscle spindle is located in parallel with the muscle fi bers. It signals the muscle length and dynamic changes in muscle length. Both the muscle spindle and the Golgi tendon organ have fast conducting afferent nerve fi bers in the range of 100 ms. The muscle spindle activates a-motoneurons directly, which causes the muscle fi bers to contract. The sensitivity of the muscle spindle can be actively regulated by g-motoneurons, which are more slowly conducting. The muscle spindle provides negative feedback. If the muscle with its muscle spindle is lengthened, the afferent activity from the muscle spindle increases, exciting the a-motoneurons and leading to an increased muscle contraction, which in turn counteracts the lengthening. This is called the stretch refl ex. The Golgi tendon organ provides force feedback. The more the muscle contracts, the more the Golgi tendon organ and its afferent are activated. In the diagram the intercalated interneuron between afferent nerve fi ber and motoneuron is inhibitory. Thus increased muscle force leads to inhibition of the a-motoneuron, which results in a decrease of muscle force. The effi cacy of length and force feedback can be regulated independently in the spinal cord and via g-motoneurons. Thus their respective contributions can vary considerably between different patterns of motor behavior.of the body in relation to each other and to the external world. Such information is critical when initiating a voluntary movement. For example, to move a hand toward a given object, it is important to know the initial position of the arm and the hand in space. Depending on whether the hand is located to the left or the right of the object, different types of motor commands must be given to bring the hand to the target. Sensory information about the initial position of the hand in relation to the rest of the body, as well as the target for the movement,Both vertebrates and invertebrates have preformed microcircuits-neuronal networks that contain the necessary information to coordinate a specifi c motor pattern such as swallowing, walking, or breathing. When a given neuronal network is activated, the particular behavior it controls will be expressed. A typical network consists of a group of interneurons that activate a specifi c group of motoneurons in a certain sequence and inhibit other motoneurons that may counteract the intended movement. Such a group of interneurons often is referred to as a central pattern generator or motor program. This CPG can be activated by will, as at the start of walking, or be triggered by sensory stimuli, as in a protective refl ex or swallowing. In most types of motor behavior, sensory feedback may also form an integral part of the motor control circuit and may determine the duration of the motor activity such as the inspiratory phase of breathing There are several different types of motor coordination, as described next.Protective skin refl exes lead to withdrawal of the stimulated part of the body from a stimulus that may cause pain or tissue damage. The central program consists in this case of a group of interneurons that activate motoneurons and muscles, giving rise to an appropriate withdrawal movement. Motoneurons to antagonistic muscles are inhibited. The withdrawal refl exes of the limbs often are referred to as fl exion refl exes, but in reality they represent a family of specifi c refl exes, each of which is designed to remove the specifi c skin region involved from the painful stimulus.Coughing and sneezing refl exes remove an irritant from the nasal or tracheal mucosa by inducing a brief pulse of air fl ow at very high velocity. This is caused by an almost synchronized activation of abdominal and respiratory muscles, coordinated by a CPG, the activity of which is triggered by afferents activated by the irritant.Swallowing refl exes are activated when food is brought in contact with mucosal receptors near the pharynx. This leads to a coordinated motor act with sequential activation of different muscles that propel the food bolus through the pharynx down the esophagus to the stomach. In this case the CPG is able to contain a number of networks that are designed to control different basic patterns of the motor repertoire, such as breathing, walking, chewing, or swallowing. These networks often are referred to as central pattern generator networks. CPGs contain the necessary information to activate different motoneurons and muscles in the appropriate sequence. Some CPGs are active under resting conditions, such as that for breathing, but most are actively turned on from the brain stem or the frontal lobes. For instance, the CPG coordinating locomotor movements is turned on from specifi c areas in the brain stem, referred to as locomotor centers. These descending control signals not only turn on the locomotor CPG, but also determine the level of activity in the CPG and whether slow or fast locomotor activity will occur. In order to have the motor pattern well adjusted to external conditions and different perturbations, sensory feedback acts on the CPG and can modify the duration of different phases of the activity cycle, providing feedback onto motoneurons. Although vertebrates as well as invertebrates have CPGs for a great variety of motor functions, the intrinsic operation of these networks of interneurons constituting the CPG is unclear in most cases. In invertebrates, a few CPG networks have been studied in great detail, such as the stomatogastric system of the lobster and networks coordinating the activity of the heart and locomotion in the leech. In vertebrates detailed information concerning locomotor networks is only available in lower forms, such as the frog embryo and the lamprey. coordinate the motor act over several seconds, in contrast to the previous motor acts in which the activity occurs almost simultaneously.Walking movements are produced by CPGs in the spinal cord. These spinal CPGs are turned on by descending control signals from particular areas in the brain stem, which also determine the level of locomotor activity. The CPG then sequentially activates motoneuronsmuscles that support the limb during the support phase and then move it forward during the swing phase. Sensory stimuli from the moving limb also contribute importantly to regulate the duration of the support phase and the degree of activation of different muscles that are sequentially activated in each step cycle. The relative importance of the sensory component varies between species and with the speed of locomotion. During very fast movements, there is actually no time for sensory feedback to act, and adjustments need instead to be performed in a predictive mode.Chewing movements are controlled by brain stem circuits that in principle are designed in a similar manner to those of locomotion, and generate alternating activity between jaw-opener and -closer muscles.Breathing movements are continuously active from the instant of birth to the time of death, except for short voluntary interventions when speaking, singing, or choosing not to breathe for some other reason, like diving. The level of respiration is driven by metabolic demands detected by chemosensors in the brain stem where the respiratory CPG is also located. Sensory stimuli from lung volume receptors contribute by setting the level at which the inspiration is terminated and expiration takes over.Fast saccadic eye movements are used when looking rapidly from one object to another and are represented with a much more complex organization in the superior colliculus than the motor patterns discussed earlier. Saccadic eye movements with different directions and amplitudes can be generated by the stimulation of different microregions in the superior colliculus, according to a well-defi ned topographical map. Each microregion is responsible for activating a subset of brain stem interneurons, which in turn activates the appropriate combination of eye motoneurons in order to move the two eyes in a coordinated fashion from one position to another. The purpose is to bring the visual object of interest into the foveal region so that it can be scrutinized in the greatest detail. To recruit a saccadic eye movement to a specifi c site, cortical or subcortical areas have to access the appropriate microregions within the superior colliculus to trigger the specifi c eye movement desired.Other types of eye movement control are used when tracking an object that is moving, as when watching a game of tennis. These tracking movements are represented in the cerebral cortex and the brain stem.Animals, including humans, have the ability to position the body in a variety of postures. The most stable position is lying horizontally in bed, which requires little activity from the nervous system. The situation is very different when standing and even more so when supporting oneself on one leg. This requires a very structured command to handle the activation of different muscles in the legs, trunk, shoulders, and neck. The nervous system issues this complex motor command to achieve a certain position. The ability to maintain a stable position standing on one leg is then critically dependent on feedback from a variety of sensory receptors that detect falling to one side or the other. These receptors activate refl ex circuits that try to counteract the impending loss of balance. Of great importance are the vestibular receptors located in the head, which sense head movements in the different directions. Vestibular refl exes act on the neck muscles to correct the position of the head, and vestibulospinal refl exes act on the trunk and the extensor muscles of the limbs. In addition, vestibular effects also are mediated indirectly by the reticulospinal system. Muscle receptors in neck and limb muscles are of equal importance. They also play a critical role in detecting and compensating for postural perturbations, in particular around the ankle, where skin receptors on the bottoms of the feet are activated. Finally, visual feedback may contribute as when one is standing on a moving surface such as the deck of a boat.The body can be arranged in a number of ways, sitting in a relaxed way on a sofa, stiffl y on an uncomfortable chair, or standing with the body and the legs held in a range of postures. In one sense the postural system is essentially automatic in that there is no conscious thought about how to achieve a given position. However, one can decide at will what posture to assume. In that sense it is a voluntary motor act organized to a large extent on the brain stem level, but is also affected by areas in the frontal lobe located just in front of the motor cortex.The different basic motor patterns are present in different forms in most vertebrates and invertebrates. In the former, the underlying neural networks are located either in the brain stem or in the spinal cord, and in the latter, in the chain of ganglia. In vertebrates, from fi sh to mammals the basic organization of the nervous system is similar with regard to the spinal cord, brain stem, and diencephalon. Each species and larger group of vertebrates may have specializations related to particular types of functions, and complexity increases during evolution. The cerebral cortex, with its distinct lamination, is present in mammals and most highly developed in primates, including humans The brainstem-spinal cord is, to a large extent, responsible for the coordination of different basic motor patterns. The spinal cord contains the motor programs for protective refl exes and locomotion, whereas those for swallowing, chewing, breathing, and fast saccadic eye movements are located in the brain stem. In most cases, however, both the brain stem and the spinal cord are involved to some degree. In mammals as well as lower vertebrates, the brain stem-spinal cord, isolated from the forebrain, is able to produce breathing movements and swallowing, as well as walking and standing. These brain stem-spinal cord animals can thus be made to walk, trot, and gallop with respiration adapted to the intensity of the movements and to swallow when food is put in their mouths. However, they perform these maneuvers in a stereotyped fashion, such as a robot or a refl ex machine. The movements are thus not goal directed nor adapted to the surrounding environment, but nevertheless are coordinated in an appropriate way.Mammals that are devoid of the cerebral cortex but have the remaining parts of the nervous system intact have been used to investigate the importance of these areas. Such animals display a more advanced behavioral repertoire when compared to the brain stem animals described earlier. At fi rst glance, these decorticate animals look surprisingly normal. They move around spontaneously in a big room and can avoid obstacles to some extent. They eat and drink spontaneously and can learn where to obtain food and search for food when supposedly hungry. They may also display emotions such as rage and attack other animals however, they appear unable to interact in a normal way with other individuals of the same species. Even without the cerebral cortex, a surprisingly large part of the normal motor repertoire can be performed,  for locomotion and protective refl exes, whereas the brain stem contains CPGs for breathing, chewing, swallowing, and saccadic eye movements. The hypothalamus in the forebrain contains centers that regulate eating and drinking. These areas can coordinate the sequence of activation of different CPGs. For instance, if the fl uid intake area is activated, the animal starts looking around for water, walks toward the water, positions itself to be able to drink, and fi nally starts drinking. The animal will continue to drink as long as the stimulation of the hypothalamic area is sustained. This is an example of recruitment of different CPGs in a behaviorally relevant order. The cerebral cortex is important, particularly for fi ne motor coordination involving hands and fi ngers and for speech.including some aspects of goal-directed behavior. Thus the cerebral cortex is not required to achieve this level of complex motor behavior.The diencephalon and subcortical areas of the telencephalon of the forebrain contain two major structures that are important in this context: the hypothalamus and the basal ganglia. The hypothalamus is composed of a number of nuclei that control different autonomic functions, including temperature regulation and intake of fl uid and food. The latter nuclei become activated when the osmolality is increased or the glucose levels become low. Stimulation of the paraventricular nucleus involved in the control of fl uid intake results in a sequence of motor acts involving a number of different motor programs. Continuous activation of this nucleus by electrical stimulation or local ejection of a hyper-osmolalic physiological solution leads to an alerting reaction. The animal fi rst starts looking for water. It then starts walking toward the water, positions itself at the water basin, bends forwards, and starts drinking. The animal will continue drinking as long as the nucleus is stimulated. These hypothalamic structures thus are able to recruit a sequence of motor acts that appear in a logical order. Other parts of this region can elicit rage and attack behavior, as was fi rst described by the Nobel laureate Walter Hess.Basal ganglia constitute a second major structure. They are present in all vertebrates and are of critical importance for the normal initiation of motor behavior. They are subdivided into an input region activated by the cerebral cortex, thalamus, and the brain stem and an output region. The output neurons are inhibitory and have a very high level of activity at rest. They inhibit a number of different motor centers in the diand mesencephalon and also infl uence the motor areas of the cerebral cortex via the thalamus. The input stage of the striatum determines the level of activity in the different pallidal output neurons. When a motor pattern, such as a saccadic eye movement, is going to be initiated, the pallidal output neurons that are involved in eye motor control become inhibited by the striatum. This means that the tonic inhibition produced by these neurons at rest is removed, and the saccadic motor centers in mesencephalon are relieved from tonic inhibition and become free to operate and induce an eye saccade to a new visual target.In contrast to the tonically active output neurons of the basal ganglia, the striatal neurons are silent at rest and have membrane properties that make it diffi cult to activate them from cortex or thalamus unless the dopamine system is active. The level of activity in the striatum is strongly modulated by dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and associated nuclei. If the level of dopamine activity is reduced, as in Parkinsons disease, it becomes very diffi cult to activate the striatal neurons and thereby to initiate and carry out most types of movements. This is a severe handicap characterized by paucity of movement. The converse condition with enhanced levels of dopamine in the basal ganglia results instead in a richness of movements, and even in unintended movements. These movements may be well coordinated, but are without a purpose, and occur without the conscious involvement of the patient. Dopamine neurons are thus of critical importance for the operation of the striatum and they regulate the responsiveness of the striatal circuitry to input from the cerebral cortex and thalamus. The striatum in itself clearly has a key role for the operation of the entire motor system.In the frontal lobe there are several major regions that are involved directly in the execution of different complex motor tasks, such as the skilled movements used to control hands and fi ngers when writing, drawing, or playing an instrument. Another skilled type of motor coordination is that underlying speech, which is served by Brocas area. These different regions are organized in a somatotopic fashion. In the largest area, referred to as the primary motor cortex or M1 in the precentral gyrus, the legs and feet are represented most medially and the trunk, arm, neck, and head are represented progressively more laterally. Areas taken up by the hands and the oral cavity are very large in humans, and are much larger than that for the trunk. This is explained by the fact that speech and hand motor control require a greater precision and thus a larger cortical processing area than the trunk. The latter is important for postural control but is less involved in the type of skilled movement controlled by the motor cortex The large pyramidal cells in the motor cortex send their axons to the contralateral side of the spinal cord and are able to activate their target motoneurons directly, but a number of interneurons in the brain stem or spinal cord also are infl uenced. These long projection neurons are called corticospinal neurons. , with the legs represented most medially, arms and hand more laterally, and the oral cavity and face even more so. Note that the two areas that are represented with disproportionally large regions are the hand with fi ngers and the oral cavity. They are represented in this way due to the fi ne control required in speech and fi ne manipulation of objects with the fi ngers. Adapted from Penfi eld and Rasmussen The cortical control of movement is executed in part by the direct corticospinal neurons but also by cortical fi bers that project to brain stem nuclei, which in turn contain neurons that project to spinal motor centers such as the fast rubrospinal, vestibulospinal, and reticulospinal pathways. The brain stem contains a large number of descending pathways that can initiate movements and correct motor performance, or provide more subtle modulation of the spinal circuitry. The former act rapidly in the millisecond time frame that is required in motor control. Examples of the latter are the slow-conducting and slow-acting noradrenergic and serotonergic pathways. These pathways set the responsiveness of different types of neurons, synapses, and spinal circuits. In addition, there are direct projections from the cerebral cortex to the input area of the basal ganglia, the striatum. The cortical control of motor coordination thus is achieved through both direct action on spinal and brain stem motor centers but also to a signifi cant degree by parallel action on a variety of brain stem nuclei. The execution of movements that are initiated from the cortex is, to a large degree, a collaborative effort of many parts of the nervous system. The reticulospinal and vestibulospinal pathways mediate the control of posture, and the former take part in the initiation of locomotion, via the CPG located in the spinal cord Judging from experiments on mammals and primates, and patients that have suffered focal lesions of the frontal lobe, the cortical control of movement is of particular importance for dexterous and fl exible motor coordination, such as the fi ne manipulatory skills of fi ngers and hands and also for speech. It is very difficult for a casual observer to see the difference between a normal monkey moving around in a natural habitat and a monkey that is lacking the corticospinal direct projections to the spinal cord but has all other cortical circuits intact. They are able to move around, climb, and locomote as normal monkeys. It is only when special tests are performed that one can see that delicate independent movements of the individual fi ngers are incapacitated. This is a type of motor coordination that is needed in monkeys and other primates for skilled manipulations of the environment, such as picking fi ne food objects from small holes.The most fl exible types of motor coordination, such as the skilled movements of the fi ngers and hands or in speech, involve the frontal lobes. These types of movements often are referred to as voluntary because they are performed at will. This terminology is commonly used, although inappropriate in that more basic types of motor coordination, such as the ones used when walking, chewing, or positioning ourselves in a relaxed posture, are also controlled by will, although motor coordination is handled to a larger degree by FIGURE 28.8 Summarizing scheme of the interaction between different motor centers. The different major compartments of the motor system and their main pathways for interaction are indicated. The basic functions of the different compartments and descending tracks are summarized on and below the scheme. Visuomotor coordination is very demanding and requires complex processing. When visualizing an approaching object like a ball, a rapid calculation provides information to bring the arms to the appropriate spot to grasp the ball at just the right time. This is an amazing achievement considering the necessity of predicting where and when the ball will arrive, the details about joint angles from hand to head that need to be considered to elicit the appropriate commands to the different muscles involved, and the time constraints. There are extensive projections to the frontal lobes from the areas in the parietal lobe processing visual information about movement.It is clear that in order to arrive at an accurate and precise motor command, a large amount of information of different types needs to be processed about the dynamic and static conditions of the different parts of the body in relation to each other and the surrounding world. The processing time under different conditions has been investigated experimentally by having a subject respond to a signal and perform a movement, such as pressing a button when a light goes on. The delay is around 0.1 to 0.2 s and is called the reaction time. It represents a minimal delay for a given test situation that cannot be shortened by training The more complex the situation is, the longer the reaction time. If a choice is involved, such as responding by pressing different buttons to light stimuli of different colors, the time delays become much longer than in the simple reaction time task. The choice reaction task time increases in proportion to the level of complexity and the number of choices The cerebellum is a structure that is also involved in the coordination of movement. Although the cerebellum is smaller than the cerebral cortex in volume, it contains as many nerve cells as the latter. It is characterized by a very stereotyped neuronal organization with two types of inputs from mossy and from climbing fi bers. These inputs not only carry information from the spinal cord about ongoing movements in all different parts of the body, but also information from the different motor centers about planned movements even before a movement has been executed. The cerebellum also interacts with practically all parts of the cerebral cortex. This means that it is updated continuously about what goes on in all parts of the body with regard to movement and also about the movements that are planned in the immediate future. Lesions of the cerebellum lead initially to great problems with postural stability and with the accuracy of different types of movements. It is noteworthy that movements in general can be carried out, but their quality is reduced drastically. Therefore, the cerebellum originally was thought to be involved exclusively in the coordination of movement. In addition to motor control, evidence has accumulated that the lateral parts of cerebellum may also be involved in different cognitive tasks.The cerebellum is subdivided into a great number of different regions that process different kinds of information. These different regions respond via their output neurons, called Purkinje cells. The cerebellar cortex contains only inhibitory interneurons, and the two input systems, climbing fi bers and mossy fi bers, provide the excitatory components. All Purkinje cells are inhibitory and project to the cerebellar nuclei, which in turn are excitatory and project to different motor centers in the brain stem and to the cortex via the thalamus.Each granule cell receives very specifi c input from only a few mossy fi bers, which are able to make them fi re. The granule cell axons form parallel fi bers in the cerebellar cortex, and thousands of parallel fi bers impinge on each Purkinje cell that has a very extensive dendritic tree. It is believed that only a small portion of these parallel synapses are functional in any given moment, but that they are available to become recruited in learning situations. In contrast, there is only one climbing fi ber for each Purkinje cell. The climbing fi bers can serve as "error detectors," at least under some conditions. Through the interaction of climbing fi bers with the parallel input, the synaptic effi cacy of the input of the latter synapse onto the Purkinje cell can be regulated. This change in effi cacy can last over many hours and possibly much longer and is therefore referred to as long-term depression. It is generally thought that this LTD can contribute to motor learning. With regard to basic movements such as posture, walking, and the much-studied eye-blink refl ex, the cerebellum clearly is involved through each movement phase. It is likely that the fi ne-tuning and modifi cation of movements that are required in different behavioral contexts involve the cerebellum. With regard to the eye-blink refl ex, motor learning has been demonstrated in terms of associating an unconditioned stimulus with a conditioned one. It requires that the cerebellar cortex is intact, which strongly suggests that the cerebellar cortex contributes importantly to this type of motor learning. The cerebellum is clearly of importance for the long-term adaptation of different patterns of basic motor coordination.There is still, however, much to learn about the actual processing that goes on in the cerebellum, a structure that regulates the quality of motor performance and appears to be involved in one form of motor learning. A variety of complex motor tasks, including speech and handwriting, can still be performed, but with less accuracy. Thus, the motor programs for these learned tasks cannot be stored exclusively in the cerebellum. When new types of movements are learned, such as riding a bicycle, playing an instrument, or typing at a keyboard, the new stored programs for sequences of motor acts must also involve other structures in the brain, most likely the basal ganglia and the cerebral cortex.All vertebrate and invertebrate species with a nervous system have a motor infrastructure that is determined evolutionarily. In the case of primates including humans, there are preformed circuits that allow performance of a basic movement repertoire, as well as basic circuits that underlie reaching, hand and fi nger movements, and sound production as in speech. This constitutes the motor infrastructure that is available to a given individual, after maturation of the nervous system has occurred.The motor system is in addition characterized by its ability to learn, in what is referred to as motor or procedural learning. The cortex and basal ganglia play an important role for learning of new motor sequences and skills, and cerebellum is indispensable for the quality of the different motor patterns and the ability to associate two stimuli as during conditioned refl exes. For instance, one can learn how to play an instrument like the fl ute. The particular fi nger settings that produce a given tone can be retained in memory, along with the sequence of tones that produce a certain melody. Thus particular muscle combinations that produce a sequence of well-timed motor patterns are stored. Similarly, when learning to pronounce different sounds and combine them in words, muscle activation patterns are stored. A simpler case occurs when learning to recombine basic movement patterns to be able to maintain equilibrium while bicycling. There are a large number of examples involving different types of motor learning and parts of the body.It is characteristic of a given learned motor program that one can "call" upon it to perform a given motor act over and over again. Despite this, there is generally little awareness of the way in which the movement actually is performed in terms of the muscles involved and their timing. Information thus has been stored in the nervous system with regard to which parts of the infrastructure of the motor system should be used to produce a given learned motor pattern, as well as the exact timing between the different components. However, the details of the complex storage process are not yet fully understood.After this overview of the motor control system, it should be apparent that biological evolution has succeeded in refi ning remarkable sensorimotor machinery capable of executing the motor tasks required for the full behavior of a given species. The degree of diffi culty involved is apparent when watching the clumsiness and lack of fl exibility in robots, characteristic of even the most advanced models that have been developed. Details of the different neural subsystems involved in motor control are dealt with in the following chapters.Not all animals control muscle contraction in the same way as mammals. Differences are found in the proteins and structure of the muscle fi ber, the number of neuromuscular junctions on each muscle fi ber, the neurotransmitters used at the neuromuscular junction, and the number of motor neurons contacting each muscle fi ber. Major differences are found in invertebrates, which often have evolved adaptations that suit their movement patterns or constraints imposed by their environments.Some invertebrates require muscles that generate great forces or provide mechanical stiffness. One solution used by mussels, the nematode C. elegans, and the fruit fl y Drosophila is the incorporation of molecules of paramyosin into thick fi laments, so that additional cross-bridges can be formed. Mussel retractor muscles also have a specialized catch property, in which cross-bridges are tightly bound with low energy expenditure until the catch state is released by neurotransmitter action that leads to phosphorylation of twitchin, a titin-like molecule. Very slow movements can be achieved by long sarcomeres, since Ca 2 diffusion throughout the sarcomere takes longer. In mammalian muscle fi bers, sarcomeres are generally 2-3 microns long, although longer sarcomeres occasionally are found in muscles that stiffen but do not twitch, such as the tensor tympani muscle of the cat eardrum. In contrast, claw muscles of crabs may have sarcomeres from 6-18 microns, and one marine worm was found to have sarcomere lengths of 30 microns.Most mammalian muscles usually contain a mixture of muscle fi ber types, but some animals have distinct muscles for fast and slow movements. Trout, for example, use red muscles composed of slow twitch fi bers for sustained swimming and white, fast twitch muscles for leaping and rapid bursts of speed.Mammals and birds use acetylcholine as the transmitter at the neuromuscular junction. So does C. elegans, but many other invertebrates use glutamate, including arthropods such as Drosophila, locust, and crayfi sh. Corelease of glutamate and peptides occurs at some neuromuscular junctions, such as the peptide FMRF-amide in the sea snail Aplysia. Crustacean muscles have separate excitatory and inhibitory neuromuscular junctions that use glutamate and GABA.In mammals, most muscle fi bers are innervated by a single motor neuron, with a few exceptions, such as laryngeal muscles and spindles. Innervation by more than one motor neuron is seen in some avian muscles, and many invertebrate muscles. The motor neurons may merely have an additive function, as in Drosophila, where recruitment of motor neurons produces graded contractions of the muscle. In other animals, the different motor neurons may play distinct roles. The locust jumping muscle has a dual arrangement, with one motor neuron that produces a rapid and powerful excitation and another that produces graded excitation and contraction.Lastly, the central control of motor neurons differs. In mammals, a motor neuron action potential leads inevitably to a muscle fi ber action potential. In crayfi sh, presynaptic inhibition of motor terminals allows modulation at a more distant site. Structural specializations, such as electrical synapses onto motor neurons and gap junctions between motor neurons, often occur in invertebrates, but generally are found only during development in mammals. The distributed structure of invertebrate systems and rich palette of ion channels expressed by motor neurons is favorable to the formation of motor pattern generating circuits.BOX 29.1during the swing phase and extensor muscles during the stance phase. However, within each phase, the individual muscles have a more elaborate and fi nely graded timing and pattern of activation. Stepping can also be performed with different gaits. Gaits can be characterized by the cycle rate, the relative proportion of the cycle spent in swing and stance phases, and the phase relationships between limbs. At slow or moderate walking speeds, the extensor phase is longer than fl exion and the extension phases of opposite legs overlap. In a walking gait both feet are in simultaneous contact with the ground for some period during the cycle. As the speed of stepping increases and the cycle is shorter, the duration of the extension phase shortens, with briefer periods of double foot contact. At high speeds where there is no overlap of extension phases between the legs, the gait switches recognizably from walking to running. Although we are able to exert voluntary control over locomotion, the basic patterns of movement for locomotion can be generated by the spinal cord itself, without descending or sensory inputs. The fi rst demonstration came from Graham CPGs are now thought to consist of networks of neurons that are synaptically or electrically connected, with cellular properties that generate rhythmic fi ring. CPGs are found in many areas of the central nervous system and are responsible for different types of patterned rhythmic activities such as breathing, swallowing, chewing, and walking. The identifi cation and characterization of the neurons that comprise the locomotor CPG in the spinal cord is an active area of research that will be discussed later in this chapter.During a movement, the sensory afferents from muscles, joints, and skin will each be activated in a distinct way, refl ecting how that movement displaces joints, produces pressure on regions of skin, andThe Spinal and PeripheralMotor SystemMost coordinated movements involve the use of several muscles, each with a precisely orchestrated timing and pattern of activation and relaxation. Contraction of an individual muscle is controlled by a pool of motor neurons that innervate that muscle. Patterned contraction of several muscles requires coordination between pools of motor neurons. For many movements, interneurons in the spinal cord provide the means for coordinating activity of different motor neuron pools. A key feature of spinal interneurons is their convergent and divergent connections that allow them to integrate signals from different sources. Interneurons that receive inputs from descending motor systems and sensory afferents, for example, can update a voluntary command for limb movement to incorporate feedback from the moving limb. Spinal interneurons also form connections with other spinal interneurons to create networks that generate rhythmic patterns of excitatory and inhibitory activity. These networks play a key role for organizing rhythmic, repetitive movements such as scratching or locomotion. In this chapter, we will use locomotion as an example of a motor behavior to illustrate how the neural elements of the spinal cord and peripheral neuromuscular system operate together to carry out a movement. As details of the motor neurons, spinal interneurons, muscles, and sensory afferents are presented, the primary focus will be on mammals, but variations that occur in other vertebrates and in invertebrates are highlighted in Box 29.1.Locomotion is the act of moving from place to place. Walking, swimming, and fl ying are modes of locomotion. All modes of locomotion consist of a cycle of patterned and rhythmic activity of different muscle groups. Locomotion can be described by the phase relationships between limbs and between muscle groups during the cycle. Nonlimbed vertebrates such as lamprey swim by alternately contracting and relaxing trunk muscles on the two sides of the body-the sides are in opposite phases of the cycle. Along the length of the lampreys body, there is a slight phase lag between segments, creating the propulsive wave that moves it forward. In contrast, birds activate their wings synchronously in fl ight-the limbs are in phase, with no lag.Stepping, the major form of mammalian locomotion, is a cycle with two phases: stance and swing. In people, the stance phase begins when the heel strikes the ground and the leg begins to bear weight. As stance progresses, the weight is gradually shifted forward, rolling from the heel to the ball of the foot. The swing phase begins when the toe leaves the ground and the leg moves forward. To accomplish this motor sequence within one leg, muscles acting across the hip, knee, or ankle are activated in a characteristic pattern 