Organisms must constantly exchange various substances with the environment for homeostasis and ultimately, survival. Different physiological systems handle solid, liquid, and gaseous metabolic precursors and by-products. Aerobic metabolism consumes O 2 and produces CO 2 , the so-called blood gases. Organisms with large surface-to-volume ratios, such as bacteria, yeast, plants, and insects, rely on passive diffusion for gas exchange with the environment. However, vertebrates, with low external surface-to-volume ratios, actively pump gas using respiratory muscles to exchange air between the environment and the lungs (which in mammals have an exceptionally high surfaceto-volume ratio) and the heart moves blood through and between the pulmonary and systemic circulations. The role of the brain in breathing is preeminent, as it generates the motor outfl ow driving the contraction and relaxation of skeletal muscles that pump the lung and modulates the tone of skeletal and smooth muscles in the upper airways and bronchi to control resistance to air fl ow.Mammals that are neither diving nor hibernating, including humans, need a constant supply of O 2 to support their high metabolic rate, and so must breathe continuously from birth until death without lapses of more than a few minutes. Breathing appropriate for the regulation of blood O 2 and CO 2 is adaptable over a 20-fold range in metabolism (in humans from 0.25 liter × min −1 O 2 consumed at rest to ∼3-6 liter × min −1 O 2 consumed during maximal exercise). Respiratory muscles account for ~5% of the body's metabolism at rest, and need to be used effi ciently because the metabolic cost adds up over time. Moreover, serious respiratory muscle fatigue must be avoided. During exercise, energy costs of breathing must be kept low when possible (the respiratory pump moves from 5 (at rest) up to 200 (maximal performance in world-class athletes) liters × min −1 of air) to maximize the amount of O 2 available to other working muscles.The drive for continuous ventilation in humans is strong. Typically, breathing is the last consequential movement to disappear following generalized depression of higher function, such as during surgical anesthesia or following insults to the brain (e.g., hypoglycemic coma). Automatic, homeostatic breathing can remain in people who have lost cortical function, resulting in ethical and emotional dilemmas over people who are "brain dead."Neuroscientists take advantage of this robustness of breathing to study synaptic, neural, and network mechanisms in anesthetized or decerebrate mammals that continue to breathe. These mechanisms are so robust and suffi ciently self-contained that an in vitro tissue slice at an appropriate level in neonatal or late fetal rodent brain stem continues to generate respiratory-related patterns of motor nerve activity.Although the purpose of breathing-to move air into and out of the lungs-was not established until the late eighteenth century, the underlying sites have been a constant source of speculation in Western culture. Perhaps the earliest suggestion that the brain was involved came from , who observed that gladiators and animals injured below the neck continued to breathe, but those injured in the neck stopped. Breathing, chewing, and locomotion are important behaviors that require rhythmic movements with periods ∼seconds. The underlying neural networks are programmed genetically and develop in utero so that newborn mammals breathe, chew, and, in some cases, locomote. How does the brain generate the rhythmic movements underlying breathing?Although functionally straightforward (air in, air out), breathing from the brain's point of view is much more than rhythm generation. Ventilation requires a patterned motor output with appropriate timing and magnitude of muscle contraction and relaxation with precise coordination among synergists and antagonists. A complex and mutable regulatory network composed of many distinct components, including forebrain, brainstem, and spinal cord circuitry, interacts to adjust breathing as necessary during life Three distinct functional classes of rhythmically active (respiratory) neurons underlie the generation of respiratory pattern: motoneurons innervating skeletal muscles of the respiratory pump and airways; rhythm generating neurons; and premotoneurons that link and coordinate rhythm generation to motoneurons. Nonrhythmic neurons that modulate the behavior of these respiratory neurons are also important. Brainstem respiratory neurons are concentrated within three regions ( The DRG is in the dorsomedial medulla caudal to mid-rostral portions of the NTS. The DRG is a source of input to spinal cord respiratory motoneurons in some species, but less so in others.The VRC forms a continuous fi eld in the ventrolateral medulla with fi ve or more physiologically distinct subregions extending from around the facial nucleus to the spinomedullary junction. Distinct anatomical compartments within the VRC are inferred from clustering of similar types of respiratory neurons (e.g., inspiratory or expiratory neurons), presence or absence of spinal cord projections, and responses to chemical stimulation. Specifi c respiratory neuron types are not restricted to individual compartments, but overlap with the peak concentrations of particular neuron types centered within given compartments. The caudal half of the VRC, termed the ventral respiratory group (VRG), contains bulbospinal respiratory premotoneurons that receive converging inputs from VRC rhythm generating neurons and neurons outside the VRC, sculpting the activity pattern distributed to various pools of respiratory motoneurons. The VRG is subdivided into rostral (rVRG) and caudal (cVRG) based on the peak concentrations of inspiratory (rVRG) versus expiratory (cVRG) bulbospinal neurons. Inspiratory bulbospinal neurons provide mainly excitatory input to spinal inspiratory motor pools, including monosynaptic input to phrenic motoneurons. Expiratory bulbospinal neurons in the cVRG are mainly excitatory and project to interneurons innervating thoracic and upper lumbar motoneurons that drive expiratory pump muscles (e.g., internal intercostal and abdominal muscles). Inhibitory expiratory neurons in the vicinity of the Bötzinger complex (BötC) and cVRG inhibit spinal inspiratory motor pools. Spinal cord injury that damages the axons of these bulbospinal neurons can cause lifethreatening interference with the ability to breathe The PRG is in the rostral dorsolateral pons and encompasses portions of the parabrachial complex and the ventrally adjacent Kölliker-Fuse nucleus. The PRG and VRC are at either end of an essentially continuous column of respiratory and respiratory-related neurons in the lateral pons and medulla that extends rostrally from the medulla, essentially surrounds the facial nucleus, traverses the ventrolateral pons and regions adjacent to both the motor trigeminal and principal sensory trigeminal nuclei before merging dorsally with the PRG.One consideration that has impacted the classifi cation of respiratory neurons is the number of phases that constitute the mammalian respiratory cycle, and whether the parcellation of motor output into multiple phases requires that rhythm generation per se be equivalently multiphasic. Inspiration and expiration constitute two obvious phases. However, a close examination of the discharge patterns of inspiratory (e.g., diaphragm) and expiratory (e.g., internal intercostal) muscle activity shows that there can be three (or more) phases of motor output The three major brain stem clusters of neurons controlling respiration are depicted. On the left are medium-and low-magnifi cation views of labeled neurons in representative transverse sections of the pons and medulla after a retrograde tracer injection (not shown) within the rostral part of the contralateral VRG. The sections were photographed using refl ected light so that myelinated axons appear white, retrogradely labeled neurons (immunostained with diaminobenzidine) appear gold, whereas the remaining cellular areas appear gray. On the right, these retrogradely labeled cells are diagrammed (red dots) within outlines of the adjacent low-magnifi cation photomicrographs. On the right side of the diagram, the columns of respiratory neurons are identifi ed: cVRG, pink; rVRG, green; preBötC, yellow; BötC, blue, PRG, orange; RTN/pFRG, burgundy; DRG, purple. Not all the (red) retrogradely labeled neurons in the medulla are included within the respiratory regions; some of these presumably represent extrinsic neuronal relays that can modulate respiration in relation to other behavioral or metabolic demands. 4V, fourth ventricle; 7, facial nucleus; 12, hypoglossal nucleus; AP, area postrema; BötC, Bötzinger Complex; cVRG, caudal VRG; DRG, dorsal respiratory group; IO, inferior olive; KF, Kölliker-Fuse nucleus; LPB, lateral parabrachial nucleus; MPB, medial parabrachial nucleus; NAc, ambiguus nucleus, compact division; NTS, nucleus of the solitary tract; preBötC, pre-Bötzinger complex; PRG, pontine respiratory group; RMg, raphe magnus; RTN, retrotrapezoid nucleus; rVRG, rostral VRG Sp5, spinal trigeminal nucleus; VRG, ventral respiratory group. Courtesy of George F. Alheid.Diverse pattern of respiratory motor activity is exhibited on spinal (phrenic) and cranial nerves innervating the diaphragm and airways in an anesthetized rat. (A) Low-pass fi ltered trace of activity showing overall pattern of discharge. Red vertical lines indicate phase transitions between inspiration (I) and expiration 37. NEURAL CONTROL OF BREATHING VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS consist of at least two phases. The onset of exhalation marks the onset of the fi rst expiratory (E1), or postinspiratory, phase. During this phase, the diaphragm often exhibits a low level of "postinspiratory" activity that brakes diaphragmatic relaxation and slows exhalation that declines rapidly, frequently ending by midexpiration ( The naming of respiratory neurons follows from the phase(s) in which their bursting activity occurs. Thus, neurons are designated inspiratory (I), postinspiratory (post-I), or expiratory (E). Neurons that have activity in more than one phase are termed phase-spanning. In addition, neurons that discharge only during inspiration or only during expiration can have distinctly different patterns of discharge. Investigators have interpreted these diverse patterns as evidence of different roles for each group of neurons in respiratory control and have used the discharge patterns to defi ne subgroups of inspiratory and expiratory neurons. Although the total number of subgroups is relatively small, investigators have measured neuronal activities under various experimental conditions-for example, different species, different anesthesia, or decerebration-and have used slightly different criteria to name them. The result is a confusing array of population names, even to experts.Representative patterns of discharge are shown in Two factors determine the fi ring patterns of motoneurons and premotoneurons: rhythmic synaptic drive (Box 37.1) and intrinsic excitability. Typically, respiratory neurons (other than pacemaker neurons) fi re when they receive phasic excitatory drive, and they are silent during the pauses in phasic excitatory drive; during these pauses they typically receive phasic inhibitory drive. Fast excitatory drive is probably similar throughout the respiratory control system. Application of antagonists of excitatory amino acid receptors reduces the phasic activity of brainstem respiratory neurons, including those in the preBötC and in the VRC Reciprocal Inhibition. Between phases of excitatory inputs (e.g., during expiration in inspiratory neurons), most respiratory motoneurons and premotoneurons are actively inhibited. Because these neurons are not spontaneously active, why is it necessary to inhibit them when they are not receiving excitatory input? Most likely, reciprocal inhibition prevents their spurious activation from unexpected afferent inputs that would cause inappropriate muscle contraction. Except for motoneurons that control jaw opening, which must be activated rapidly when a hard object is unexpectedly bitten during chewing, all motor and premotoneurons involved in periodic movements appear subject to reciprocal inhibition. Recurrent Inhibition. There is a push-pull control of neuronal fi ring during a burst, that is, excitation and inhibition are concurrent, with the net balance determining the fi ring pattern. Reduction of inhibition (e.g., by the administration of inhibitory receptor blockers to motoneurons) results in increased burst amplitudes. Phase-Transition Inhibition. Inhibition is postulated in many network models for breathing to arrest the activity of neurons producing one phase, thereby allowing transition into the next phase, as the neurons of the next phase become active.Fast synaptic inhibition in brainstem respiratory networks is associated with an increase in permeability to Cl − , mediated by GABA and glycine. Blocking GABA A receptors increases discharge of all VRG neurons. GABA appears to participate in reciprocal and phase-transition inhibitions to help maintain Neuroscientists are constrained by what they can measure. Noninvasive experiments in humans reveal the phenomenology of breathing; for example, the relationship between ventilation and blood CO 2 levels. Brain imaging may reveal which regions are involved, but at present, spatiotemporal resolution is too coarse to show networks, much less neurons or synapses. Respiration lends itself to study because mammals suitable for experimentation breathe much like humans. Breathing continues following anesthesia or decerebration, and the neural patterns remain following paralysis (and mechanical ventilation), making possible experimental procedures requiring highly invasive techniques, such as single neuron recording. Compared to studies of neurons in culture or in tissue slices, experiments in whole mammals have serious limitations. For example, movements of the heart and lungs make certain types of single neuron recording diffi cult in the brain stem and spinal cord. Moreover, in live animals, the blood-brain barrier is intact, making precise control of brain extracellular fl uid impossible. Finally, experiments are expensive and can last 36 h or more, requiring the dedicated and concurrent efforts of several investigators. Fortunately, the robust features of breathing that allow it to persist when other behaviors are suppressed by anesthesia or decerebration permit further reduction in the experimental preparation that removes these limitations. For example, a respiratory-related rhythm persists in the brainstem and spinal cord removed from a neonatal rodent. In addition, the rhythm persists in a particular slice of brain stem isolated from this preparation appropriate timing of discharges in (pre)motor networks. GABA also appears to play a key role in regulating the baseline discharge frequency of VRG respiratory neurons, as antagonism of GABA A receptors with bicuculline amplifi es the discharge pattern.In inspiratory neurons, glycinergic transmission appears to mediate the rapid inhibition at the beginning of expiration. Despite the clear role of synaptic inhibition in maintaining appropriate patterns of activity within the premotor circuitry, respiratory rhythms can be generated in the absence of phasic synaptic inhibition, at least in in vitro slices (see later).The waxing and waning membrane potential underlying the periodic bursting of motoneurons can be ascribed simply to the alternating release of glutamate, GABA, and glycine. Given the straightforward task of these motoneurons, especially for muscle as specialized as the diaphragm, one might presume that little more is required to control their excitability. Yet the picture is much richer and provides some insight into possible roles for the diversity of transmitters.For all respiratory neurons including motoneurons, neuromodulators affect their discharge pattern. Modulators that alter respiratory rhythm and pattern include serotonin, catecholamines (norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine), acetylcholine, adenosine, and numerous peptides (typically colocalized with the DISCHARGE PATTERNS OF RESPIRATORY NEURONS 862 37. NEURAL CONTROL OF BREATHING VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS amines), including substance P, neuropeptide Y, galanin, met-enkephalin, cholecystokinin, and thyrotropin-releasing hormone Although it has been known since the late eighteenth century that the brainstem is responsible for respiratory rhythm generation, precise localization of neurons involved required the development of novel in vitro preparations (Box 37.1). In the 1980s, Suzue and colleagues Further demonstration of the essential role of the preBöC in respiratory rhythm generation follows from the observation that local activation of receptors for substance P or for opioids, which are expressed on restricted subsets of neurons within the preBötC, change respiratory frequency. Targeted destruction of preBötC neurokinin-1 (NK1) receptor-expressing neurons with the toxin saporin (a ribosomal toxin that interferes with the synthesis of new proteins) conjugated to substance P disrupts breathing. By itself, saporin is not taken up appreciably by neurons. However, when substance P binds to the NK1 receptor, the ligand-receptor is internalized, and when substance P is conjugated to saporin, the toxin is dragged along into the neuron. The result is that neurons expressing the NK1 receptor in the region of the injection die after several days. This delayed effect permits injected rats to fully recover from surgery prior to determining the impact of the toxin on breathing. During the initial postinjection period, rats breathe normally, even during sleep. However, after several days, rats continue to breathe normally during wakefulness but have sleep disordered breathing. After a few more days, with substantial bilateral destruction of the NK1 preBötC neurons, rats develop a highly abnormal breathing pattern during wakefulness and are essentially unable to breathe during sleep; they are unable to maintain normal levels of blood O 2 and CO 2 , and have pathological responses to hypoxia and hyperoxia. Nevertheless, the rats maintain suffi cient ventilation to survive. These results suggest that preBötC neurons are required for normal breathing, but in their absence, other neurons can generate an ataxic breathing pattern suffi cient to maintain life. The identity of the neurons generating this remaining rhythm is unknown but could include preBötC neurons lacking NK1 receptors or even neurons that normally generate volitional breathing movements.Taken together, these experiments underlie the now widely accepted view that the preBötC is an essential component of the circuitry generating breathing rhythm.Another collection of neurons, near the ventral medullary surface, rostral to the preBötC, may also be FIGURE 37.7 A respiratory rhythm generating slice preparation from a rodent brain stem exhibits endogenous respiratory rhythm in cranial nerve XII with patch-clamp recordings from a preBötC neuron. Diagram of a transverse slice. Patch-clamp recordings can be made from XII or preBötC cells while drugs (or different solutions) are supplied in a bath or applied locally. The rhythm is generated in preBötC and transmitted to the XII nucleus so it appears in motor axons of the XII nerve. (Right) A recording from a preBötC inspiratory neuron that shows periodic, inspiration modulated depolarizations and associated action potentials (current-clamp) (upper tracing). Lower tracing is a XII nerve recording; bursts of activity correspond to inspiration.Spinal injuries that affect the long axons of bulbospinal premotoneurons, which transmit respiratory drive to spinal motoneurons, can be life-threatening. With respect to the control of breathing, the severity of the injury depends on the spinal cord level at which the injury occurs. Damage between T1 and S1, in addition to causing sensory and motor defi cits in the legs (see Chapters 25 and 29, this volume), can produce loss of control of intercostal muscles, leading to a diminished ability to generate inspiratory or expiratory movements. Injury between C4 and C8 can cause quadriplegia and loss of control of all intercostal musculature. Although innervation of the diaphragm may remain (with low cervical damage), the lack of chest wall control means the diaphragm must do more work; these patients frequently experience an alarming sense of difficulty breathing 37. NEURAL CONTROL OF BREATHING VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS essential for rhythmogenesis. They are proximal to the facial nucleus in the pFRG; they may also be coextensive with the RTN, and we will refer to them as the 1. RTN/pFRG neurons are rhythmically active neurons in en bloc preparations. 2. When isolated from the preBötC by intramedullary transection in these preparations, both the block containing the preBötC and that containing the RTN/FRG can generate a rhythm. 3. When exposed to m-opiates, inspiratory activity in slices (which contain the preBötC but not the RTN/pFRG) slow down continuously, whereas inspiratory activity in en bloc preparations and in vivo slows discontinuously, a phenomena referred to as quantal slowing So, it appears that the preBötC and RTN/pFRG each have the intrinsic capacity to generate a respiratory rhythm, but normally are entrained to produce a single rhythm.Thus, although many structures can modulate respiratory pattern, the working hypothesis of many in the fi eld is that there are (at least) two coupled oscillators, the preBötC and the RTN/pFRG. An additional hypothesis is that inspiratory rhythm is generated by the preBötC and active expiration by the RTN/pFRG Why two oscillators? Breathing in mammals is the end result of an evolutionary lineage of rhythmic movements that are closely driving rhythmic activity in gills of fi sh and adaptations related to the transformation of the swim bladder into the lung. Tadpoles have two distinct breathing patterns that can act separately or in tandem, with the "lung" rhythm opiate-sensitive whereas the "buccal" rhythm is not. The relative role of the two oscillators may differ between mammals and nonmammals, since the power stroke for breathing is primarily inspiratory and diaphragm-driven in mammals, whereas in most reptiles and amphibians, the power stroke is dominated more by expiratory effort.Opiate-sensitivity clearly has consequences at birth, when there is a signifi cant surge of maternally-derived opiates in the newborn mammal. This opiate surge should depress the opiate-sensitive preBötC; the unaffected RTN-pFRG may play an essential role in providing the necessary respiratory drive during the early postnatal period.Almost every successful explanation of brain processes underlying complex behavior is based on a combination of cellular, synaptic, and network properties. It is easy to build computational models of simple oscillatory behavior using only network (e.g., reciprocal inhibition) or only cellular (e.g., pacemaker) properties. For several decades neuroscientists speculated that respiratory rhythm was driven by the same kinds of cellular properties that drive heart rhythm, which is generated by the pacemaker activity of specialized cells. The simplest explanation for generation of respiratory rhythm is that it is driven by pacemaker neurons, presumably located in the preBötC and/or RTN/ pFRG. The compelling, but now intensely debated, evidence that pacemaker neurons were critical came from the observation that rhythm in slices continues after blockade of postsynaptic inhibition. In vitro, neurons with bursting-pacemaker properties represent a subpopulation (5-25%) of preBötC neurons. There are two types: voltage-dependent and driven by a persistent Na conductance (I NaP ), present at birth; and those dependent on Ca 2+ and/or a Ca 2+ -activated nonspecifi c cation current (I CAN ), sparse before postnatal day 5.Since the previous edition of this book, the pacemaker hypothesis has been challenged. Now, there are data that such activity is not essential At the heart of breathing is rhythm generation. The site for automatic generation of this rhythm is within the brainstem. The consensus hypothesis is that the critical circuits lie within the preBötC and may also include the RTN/pFRG.The principal homeostatic goal of breathing is the maintenance, within narrow limits, of arterial blood O 2 and CO 2 levels; that is, arterial Po 2 = 80−100 mm Hg and Pco 2 = 35−45 mm Hg. Changes in Po 2 , Pco 2 , and pH alter chemoreceptor activity, inducing refl ex alterations in breathing that restore them toward regulated levels. Decreases in either Po 2 or pH or an increase in Pco 2 stimulates breathing, whereas increases in Po 2 or pH or a decrease in Pco 2 depress breathing.The consequences of anoxia are catastrophic (particularly for the brain), but the effects of modestly depressed or elevated Po 2 are benign. In contrast, small changes in Pco 2 can profoundly affect cellular metabolism (due in large part to consequent changes in pH). Thus, at rest and in health, ventilation is controlled mostly to regulate CO 2 ; however, in severe hypoxia, everything else is ignored. For example, the exceptionally low ambient Po 2 at the top of Mount Everest (∼40 mm Hg) results in such a strong ventilatory drive that Pco 2 in climbers without supplemental O 2 is exceptionally low (∼7 mm Hg compared with normal ∼40 mm Hg; see Box 37.3).Breathing is normally tightly controlled to maintain arterial Pco 2 within a narrow range close to 40 mm Hg. However, cardiopulmonary pathology can increase Pco 2 markedly. When Pco 2 exceeds 90-120 mm Hg, respiratory depression ensues. With further increases in Pco 2 , central nervous system function can be impaired severely; a life-threatening positive feedback loop can develop in which depression of breathing elevates Pco 2 , which further depresses breathing. In some patients with advanced chronic lung disease, and consequently elevated Pco 2 , any acute lung disease, such as bronchitis or pneumonia, can cause a further increase in Pco 2 and exacerbate respiratory depression. In these patients, the drive to breathe comes from hypoxemia (low blood Po 2 ) sensed by peripheral chemoreceptors. If these patients breathe O 2 without medical monitoring, the hypoxemia may disappear, and without this stimulus these patients' breathing may stop.Drug abuse is another cause of respiratory depression suffi cient to elevate Pco 2 to produce further respiratory depression. Narcotics, barbiturates, and most general anesthetics depress breathing and reduce the sensitivity of the chemoreceptors to elevations in Pco 2 or reductions in Po 2 . Therefore, at high doses these drugs can cause death by respiratory failure.Sleep apnea. Sleep is associated with a modest decrease in ventilation and a reduced responsiveness to deviations in Pco 2 and Po 2 . As a result, during sleep, arterial Pco 2 increases a few mm Hg and Po 2 decreases. This change in respiratory control is associated with the loss of a wakefulness-related excitatory drive. The source of this wakefulness stimulus is not known, but it may derive from corollary activity originating in the brain stem reticular-activating system.With the onset of sleep, the breathing pattern can become unstable, and apnea (defi ned as at least 10 s without breathing) can occur. Two major types of apnea have been defi ned In the less common central sleep apnea, pauses in breathing result from the failure of the central pattern generator for breathing to generate a rhythmic motor command. Mechanisms underlying central apneas are not understood, but the problem is associated with a variety of neurodegenerative diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and multiple systems atrophy (where there is evidence of loss of preBötC neurons).Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS; The mammalian brain is extremely sensitive to O 2 deprivation. Several minutes of anoxia can initiate a cascade leading to neuronal (and, if suffi ciently widespread, brain) death. Brain hypoxia can cause loss of consciousness. Accordingly, the principal O 2 sensors for breathing for the entire body, the carotid bodies, are in the bifurcation of the common carotid artery, the main portal through which O 2 enters the brain. The transduction of O 2 levels has been intensely studied since Corneille Heyman's Nobel Prize winning discovery O 2 sensors account for only a small part of the chemical drive to breathe during wakefulness, as breathing 100% O 2 reduces chemoreceptor discharge to near zero but only decreases ventilation by about 15% in awake mammals Ventilation is very sensitive to small changes in Pco 2 . In an adult human, a 1 mm Hg increase in Pco 2 leads to a 2 liter × min −1 increase in ventilation at rest (which is ∼5 liter × min −1 ). In other words, a 2.5% increase in Pco 2 at rest leads to a 40% increase in ventilation!The sites and mechanisms of CO 2 chemoreception are the subject of intense scrutiny • RTN • Serotonergic neurons in the medullary raphe nuclei • NTS • Noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus • Cerebellar fastigial nucleus • PreBötC For example, neurons within the RTN and raphe robustly respond to changes in CO 2 /pH within the physiological range and project to respiratory nuclei Many different patterns of muscle activity can produce appropriate ventilation; however, the specifi c pattern should minimize energy expenditure. Mechanical effi ciency, in turn, depends on factors such as posture, and lung and chest wall mechanics; for example, a fi brotic (stiff) lung is harder to infl ate to a given tidal volume than a normal lung, and thus for this condition, rapid, shallow breathing is more effi cient. Feedback about the mechanical status of the lungs and chest wall is provided by mechanoreceptors.Because the airways must be patent for airfl ow, airway receptors produce three of the most powerful and compelling of all refl exes: gagging, coughing, and sneezing. Another powerful refl ex that occurs at birth is stimulated by pulmonary receptors, when the transition from the liquid uterine to an air environment requires powerful inspiratory efforts (sighs) to overcome surface forces resisting the initial lung infl ation. Additional nonspecifi c refl ex stimuli, typically mechanical or thermal, further facilitate the fi rst inspiratory sighs. Special respiratory refl exes, such as sneezing and yawning, are also generated by pulmonary receptors.Mechanosensory signals are critical in adapting, adjusting, and integrating breathing with other acts of brain and body. Many movements impact directly on breathing, either by using the same muscles-for example, phonation, posture, defecation, and emesisor through mechanical linkages, such as locomotion.There are three distinct groups of lung afferents, all in the vagus nerve and terminating in the NTS (see Located in airway smooth muscle, SARs are activated when the airways stretch during lung infl ation The Breuer-Hering refl ex is one of the most intensely studied vagal refl exes. Because its activation changes respiratory frequency, the underlying mechanisms illuminate aspects of the central rhythm generator for breathing. SAR afferents monosynaptically activate "pump" neurons in the NTS. Many pump cells are GABAergic and, in some cases, glycinergic and project widely within the VRC as well as to the PRG.Located in airways, RARs initiate protective refl exes, including coughs, in response to a variety of stimuli, including large or rapid lung infl ation or defl ation, inhaled irritants, and, possibly, airway edema (see C fi ber afferent activation elicits apnea followed by rapid shallow breathing. Like RARs, C fi bers are polymodal, activated by chemical and mechanical stimuli. Their activation also enhances airway mucus secretion. Inhaled particles are trapped in the mucus and removed from the airways by the action of cilia, which continuously (in the nonsmoker) move the mucus and trapped particles toward the mouth to be swallowed or expectorated.Chemoreceptors in the carotid bodies and in the brain provide sensory input to the central circuits controlling breathing to tightly regulate Pco 2 and Po 2 within narrow limits, matching a wide range of metabolic demands. Carotid body chemoreceptors are especially sensitive to decreases in arterial Po 2 , while also sensing increases in arterial Pco 2 and decreases in arterial pH. Central chemoreceptors are exquisitely sensitive to increases in Pco 2 and decreases in pH, but respond little to changes in Po 2 . Mechanoreceptors, especially those in the lungs, are essential for the precise regulation of the timing and amplitude of breathing, and also participate in refl exes, such as coughing, that protect the airways and lungs from compromises in airfl ow.The spatiotemporal pattern of motor outputs for breathing must constantly adjust over short-time scales (e.g., due to changes in posture), medium-time scales (e.g., during exercise), and much longer time scales (e.g., to adapt to changes in lung and chest wall mechanics that accompany postnatal development, normal aging, and pulmonary disease). A good example is adaptation to hypoxia, which increases ventilation by multiple mechanisms acting in time domains lasting seconds, minutes, and hours to days A longer-lasting mechanism is revealed following repetitive brief episodes of hypoxia (three episodes of 5 min duration). As illustrated in The mechanism of respiratory long-term facilitation has been investigated extensively Long-term facilitation could underlie some of the adaptive changes to pathophysiological conditions associated with repeating episodes of hypoxia. For example, it may stablize respiration during repeated periods of sleep apnea that consequently result in episodic hypoxia. During sleep, the activity of 870 37. NEURAL CONTROL OF BREATHING VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS serotonergic raphe and noradrenergic neurons is reduced dramatically. Repeated activation of these neurons secondary to apnea-induced chemoreceptor activation could increase ventilatory drive and reduce the incidence and/or severity of subsequent apneas.An example of unstable breathing is seen in a subset of patients in whom the central network controlling breathing responds to a change in activity of the chemoreceptors by causing too large or too rapid a change in breathing, as is the case in many individuals with congestive heart failure, who often exhibit CheyneStokes respiration, especially during sleep As metabolism, posture, and sleep-wake state change, the breathing pattern must adjust rapidly to ensure appropriate and effi cient ventilation. Development and disease, as well as adaptation to changes in altitude, are processes that require slower adaptations in breathing. Amino acids, amines, peptides, and other neurotransmitters coordinate circuits generating and modulating respiratory pattern to ensure that adaptations proceed smoothly and precisely by mechanisms that remain to be determined.We have focused on the roles of the pons, medulla, and spinal cord in the control of breathing. With respect to breathing, emotional and overt behavioral responses serve respiratory homeostasis. For example, although lung irritants such as smoke can elicit a cough as a protective refl ex, mammals will avoid approaching environments where lung irritants are present, based on learned or unlearned sensory cues. Escape from environments inhospitable to respiratory homeostasis is also readily evoked and engages a broad range of higher order brain functions. It is interesting to note, however, that many organisms may voluntarily temporarily suspend breathing altogether to serve competing behavioral demands, such as mammals diving to catch prey under water.Breathing also serves other behaviors. Speech, for example, requires the coordination of jaw and facial muscles, precise tongue, upper airway, and laryngeal control, and coordinated activity of breathing muscles to produce controlled modulation of expiratory airfl ow. The anterior limbic cortex (including the rostral anterior cingulate gyrus), midbrain periaqueductal gray, parabrachial region, ventrolateral pons, brain stem respiratory nuclei, and cranial and spinal motoneurons contribute to speech.Sustained or repetitive movement of large muscles involved in such basic behaviors as fl eeing predators, FIGURE 37.10 Abnormal breathing patterns resulting from CNS disorders. The ordinate is lung volume. Adapted from Apneustic breathing is marked by prolonged inspiratory periods. In humans, the most frequent pattern is inspirations lasting 2-3 s alternating with prolonged expiratory pauses. In cats, the prolonged inspiratory periods are associated with plateaus in inspiratory drive that can last minutes (leading to death in the absence of mechanical ventilation). Apneusis is observed in people with lesions of the pons, including, or just ventral to, the pontine respiratory group. In experimental animals, apneusis requires not only lesions of the pontine respiratory group, but also interruption of vagal afferent input.Lesions of the corticobulbar or corticospinal tracts can lead to Cheyne-Stokes respiration, a rhythmic waxing and waning of the depth of breathing. Periods of no breathing (apnea) follow each period of waning inspiratory depth. Lesions of the corticobulbar and corticospinal tracts can also result in loss of voluntary control of breathing. In pseudobulbar palsy, for example, voluntary control of breathing and of cranial motoneuron function is lost secondary to a lesion often located dorsomedially in the base of the pons.Extensive bilateral damage to the medullary respiratory groups can severely disrupt or abolish respiratory rhythm, resulting in death unless artifi cial ventilation is initiated immediately. Fortunately, unilateral damage does not appear to be suffi cient to cause severe disruption of respiratory rhythm-and pattern-generating mechanisms. Because two vertebral arteries supply blood to the medulla, bilateral damage from an infarct or embolism is unlikely.Less extensive damage to medullary respiratory structures can produce ataxic breathing, an irregular pattern of breathing with apparent randomly occurring large and small breaths and periods of apnea. Breathing frequency tends to be low.Reference chasing prey, and exercising also involves higher CNS functions. During exercise the metabolic production of CO 2 increases. However, arterial Pco 2 and Po 2 change little during moderate exercise because of an increase in breathing proportional to the demand for gas exchange. This increase may be produced by a feedforward descending command from higher brain systems and sensory input from joint and muscle receptors. The latter inputs provide feedback about limb and muscle mechanics, but can be considered feed-forward with respect to the control of arterial blood gases because they may provide cues for adjusting the magnitude of the descending command. Any inadequacy in the feed-forward mechanisms to produce appropriate ventilation is immediately met by chemoreceptor feedback (mostly relevant to Pco 2 ). Thus arterial blood gases are tightly regulated during moderate exercise. The volitional initiation of exercise, signaled by suprapontine structures, likely involves parallel activation of spinal locomotor pathways and brainstem mechanisms controlling breathing and cardiovascular function so that pulmonary ventilation and gas transport change appropriately. Commands for the activation of pulmonary and locomotor muscles presumably arise in similar ways in the motor cortex, thalamus, and basal ganglia. Once the motor command has been initiated, respiratory and locomotor activities are likely coordinated at subcortical levels, including the hypothalamus. Electrical or chemical activation of the hypothalamus of an anesthetized, paralyzed cat elicits fi ctive locomotion paired with proportional increases in respiratory motor output (suggestive of exerciserelated increases in ventilation or exercise hyperpnea) and redistribution of blood fl ow consistent with the induction of locomotion Eating is a familiar behavior. In humans, it is strongly infl uenced by cultural, social, and experiential factors. Consequently, eating has been a subject of considerable interest to social and behavioral scientists. In mammals, including humans, food intake is also a regulatory behavior with the primary function of supporting the continuous energy demands of body tissues. When considered from this biological perspective, food intake is infl uenced by hunger, satiety, and the physiological mechanisms that couple eating with internal caloric supplies and a stable body weight. This chapter discusses the signals important for the central nervous system to control food intake and also describes mechanisms thought to integrate those signals.Despite decades of investigation, considerable differences of opinion still exist about how food intake is controlled. The multiple views follow one of two principles. The fi rst considers eating to be a consequence of depleted energy stores in adipose tissue, reduced use of energy-rich metabolic fuel (glucose or lipid) in some critical tissue, or both. In this schema, the purpose of eating is to restore energy reserves in adipose tissue or to increase fuel utilization to some desired level, thereby eliminating the signal to eat. This traditional "depletion-repletion" model is not the approach taken in this chapter. Rather, we subscribe to a second principle, in which hunger is thought to be initiated in part by the gradual disappearance of inhibitory satiety stimuli that were generated by the previous meal. In addition, meal initiation may occur based on learning, habits, and various social and other situations, which allow animals to take maximal advantage of their environment. According to this view, caloric homeostasis infl uences meals, albeit indirectly, and eating contributes to caloric homeostasis by providing nutrients. The storage and use of those nutrients are regulated independently by physiological mechanisms described later. We describe the properties of caloric homeostasis before we consider the control of food intake.The purpose of caloric homeostasis is to preserve cellular metabolism. Cells oxidize metabolic fuels to drive all cellular processes; thus, the higher the cellular activity, the greater the demand for energy. Because most cells have limited amounts of stored energy, they rely on a steady supply of calories and oxygen from the blood stream. Oxygen is dependably and instantaneously available via the respiratory system and is not stored in the body. In contrast, food calories can be scarce and require time after ingestion to become available to cells in signifi cant quantities. One consequence of this functional organization is the capacity of animals to store suffi cient energy to bridge long intervals during which no food is eaten.Three categories of macronutrients-carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins-provide usable energy, but the use of specifi c macronutrients by the body varies depending on the tissue. Most tissues can oxidize carbohydrates in the form of glucose or lipids in the form of free fatty acids, depending on the availability of these nutrients and the levels of certain hormones in the blood. Notable exceptions are the liver, which requires lipids for proper functioning, and the brain, which has a large, continuous need for glucose despite the ability to oxidize lipids in the form of ketone bodies. When the supply of glucose to the brain is compromised, neurons cease to function and in a few minutes consciousness is lost. Death will ensue unless glucose delivery to the brain is restored. Therefore, maintenance of circulating glucose in suffi cient amounts to support normal brain function is a critical goal of caloric homeostasis.Two distinct metabolic states are defi ned by the availability of recently consumed food to cells. The prandial, or fed, state is characterized by an abundance of newly ingested and absorbed nutrients in the blood. These molecules are sequestered rapidly in tissues to prevent them from being excreted wastefully in urine. The postabsorptive, or fasted, state is characterized by the absence of calories entering the circulation from the gastrointestinal tract and a consequent reliance on energy from metabolic fuels less recently consumed and stored. These stores are released gradually into the blood during a fast. In both states, tissues take nutrients from the blood as needed for cellular metabolism.Many tissues store carbohydrates in the form of glycogen, a polymer of glucose; the liver and skeletal muscles have the largest depots. Energy is stored more effi ciently, mainly in adipose tissue, as triglyceride, each molecule of which consists of glycerol with three attached fatty acids. During the prandial period, newly ingested food is used immediately by the body or is stored as glycogen or triglyceride. Excess carbohydrate is largely converted to lipid (lipogenesis) because glycogen storage capacity is limited, and triglyceride is a more effi cient form of stored energy. During the fasting period, liver glycogen is converted back to glucose (glycogenolysis), which enters the blood and is available to all tissues. Similarly, stored triglycerides are mobilized from adipose tissue (lipolysis) and enter the circulation as fatty acids and glycerol. The fatty acids are used by tissues as needed or are converted to ketone bodies (ketogenesis), whereas glycerol is converted to glucose (gluconeogenesis) The liver is the key organ in the traffi c of energy. Lipogenesis (which also occurs in adipose tissue) and glycogen formation occur in the liver during the prandial period, and glycogenolysis, ketogenesis, and gluconeogenesis occur during the fasting period. These processes are regulated (discussed later), as are delivery of metabolic fuels (from the small intestine into the circulation), storage of excess fuels, and mobilization of stored energy. The control system involves interplay among several hormones and the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic nervous system.Secretion of the peptide hormone insulin from B cells of the pancreatic islets is infl uenced by several factors, among which interstitial glucose is critical. Insulin secretion increases in direct proportion to the concentration of glucose in the blood and does not occur in the absence of glucose. Other substrates, such as amino acids and ketone bodies, also stimulate insulin secretion. In addition, autonomic nerves innervate the pancreatic islets: Cholinergic parasympathetic activity stimulates secretion of insulin, and a-adrenergic sympathetic activity inhibits it.When a hungry person anticipates a meal, the aroma and, subsequently, the taste of food initiate insulin secretion via neural activity. Neural signals descend from the forebrain (where the smell and taste of food are recognized) through the hypothalamus to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus in the caudal brain stem and then to the pancreas by way of cholinergic fi bers of the vagus nerve. This cephalic phase of insulin secretion helps reverse the mobilization of fuels that occurs during fasting and prepares the body for the entry of fuels from the gut. As ingested food enters the stomach and duodenum, several gastrointestinal hormones, which also are important in digestion, stimulate B cells to secrete more insulin. This gastrointestinal phase of insulin secretion ensures that the level of insulin in the circulation is high by the time digested nutrients fi rst appear in the bloodstream. Finally, nutrients absorbed from the small intestine cause even greater stimulation of insulin secretion by their direct effect on the pancreas. This substrate phase of insulin secretion increases insulin levels further, and this effect lasts well beyond the cessation of eating. As a result of these coordinated meal-related events, prandial insulin secretion is rapid and appropriate to the caloric load, and ingested fuels are effi ciently used and stored ( The amount of body fat (adiposity) is superimposed on other factors that infl uence insulin secretion. People with low adiposity have a relatively large number of active insulin receptors on adipose tissue and skeletal muscle. Obese individuals have fewer active insulin receptors. Consequently, in response to a given stimulus, secretion of insulin is lower in people who are lean than in those who are obese, but its net effects on adipose tissue are comparable. In healthy, nondiabetic people, this reciprocal relationship between the secretion of insulin and the sensitivity of most tissues to insulin ensures effi cient storage and use of fuels independent of body weight. In these individuals, plasma insulin levels in the prandial and the postprandial periods are reliable correlates of adiposity.All cells require continuous supplies of metabolic fuels to support ongoing activity. The fuels enter the circulation from the small intestine during the prandial period and from storage depots during fasting. The availability of fuels to tissues is controlled primarily by the liver and by the hormone insulin. Hepatic function and insulin secretion are in turn controlled in large part by the autonomic nervous system.The traditional view of caloric homeostasis is that animals eat when they need calories. However, as discussed earlier, the delivery of metabolic fuels to cells is continuous, and animals experience urgent needs for calories to support cellular metabolismFood presented (subject sees, smells and tastes food) Plasma insulin B a s a l s t a t e ( f a s t i n g ) C e p h a l i c p h a s e G a s t r o i n t e s t i n a l p h a s e S u b s t r a t e p h a s e FIGURE 38.2 The three phases of meal-related insulin secretion.The cephalic phase, during which parasympathetic vagal activity stimulates the pancreas, is initiated when food is seen, smelled, and tasted. The gastrointestinal phase is mediated by the direct action of digestive hormones on the insulin-secreting B cells. The prolonged substrate phase is caused by metabolic fuels (mainly glucose) directly stimulating pancreatic B cells. When meals are prolonged, the three stimuli operate simultaneously and have additive effects.only infrequently. Instead, caloric homeostasis can be related to the control of food intake in ways that are unrelated to acute cellular needs. Animals consume food in distinct bouts (i.e., meals); therefore, daily food intake refl ects the cumulative intake of multiple meals. Control factors infl uence the time when each meal is initiated and the amount of food consumed before the meal is terminated. The fi rst comprehensive study of meals was reported in 1966 by Le Magnen and Tallon. They maintained laboratory rats in cages and allowed them to eat ad libitum for weeks, during which time photosensors and electronic relays recorded intake. They obtained a full record of when meals were initiated, how much was eaten during each meal, how much time passed before the next meal, and so on. No relationship was found between how much a rat ate in a meal and how much time had passed since it had last eaten; in other words, meal sizes were unpredictable. However, the larger the meal, the longer the interval before the next meal, and the relationship was strongest during the night, when rats ate the largest meals. Thus, eating appeared to be inhibited by a satiety signal generated in proportion to the size of a meal, and eating resumed when that signal disappeared. Similar observations have since been made in many laboratories.Several meal-related factors might plausibly provide satiation signals. These include factors based on the smell, taste, and texture of food. Factors arising from the stomach could also play a role, as could intestinal and postabsorptive factors that arise after ingested food has left the stomach. In studies of rats, pregastric factors have been ruled out because little satiation is achieved when ingested food is immediately drained out through an esophageal or gastric fi stula; these animals eat continuously, as if they had no satiation despite the passage of very large amounts of food through the oropharynx Gastric stretch that accompanies meals presumably interacts with other signals to produce satiation. For example, aside from directly affecting digestion, the intestinal peptide cholecystokinin (CCK), which is secreted during meals, acts on receptors located on vagal afferent fi bers that carry gastric stretch signals from the pyloric region of the stomach to the brain stem. Thus, relatively small amounts of CCK can inhibit feeding in rats by acting synergistically with . When the gastric fi stula is closed, food passes through the stomach and into the small intestine normally. When the gastric fi stula is open, ingested food drains out the open fi stula instead of accumulating in the stomach to distend it, and no food enters the small intestine. (B) Mean consumption of liquid diet (ml/5 min) by rats with a gastric fi stula after 17 h of food deprivation. The rats consumed food in discrete meals when the fi stula was closed. When the fi stula was open, they ate continuously throughout the test period and never displayed satiety. Thus, rats consumed signifi cantly more food during the 2-h test period when their fi stulas were open than when they were closed. ns, intervals in which the amount of food consumed did not differ signifi cantly between open and closed fi stulas. From gastric distension. When given in larger doses, CCK can inhibit food intake even when the stomach is empty As rat pups mature, signals related to the caloric content of food begin to participate in the control of Several metabolically important peptides, including CCK, insulin, leptin, and glucagon, reduce food intake when administered systemically to laboratory animals. By themselves, these fi ndings do not prove that the peptides normally function as endogenous satiation agents; blood levels of an administered agent must be within the physiological range. In addition, the behavioral effects of the agent must be specifi c to the inhibition of food intake and cannot merely refl ect a secondary consequence of illness, behavioral depression, or motor incapacitation. Because investigators cannot be certain what animals sense, they must infer whether animals experience satiation in association with an observed reduction in food intake.One common approach is to determine whether the agent can cause a learned fl avor aversion in animals. People learn readily to avoid food or drink that, when ingested, produces nausea due to the unsuspected presence of some toxic contaminant. Rats and other animals seem to respond in the same way; moreover, when a toxin is administered systemically soon after consumption of an uncontaminated drink with a novel fl avor, the animals subsequently avoid fl uids of that fl avor and behave as if the drink had contained the toxic agent that made them sick. In addition, electrophysiological recording from the fi rst gustatory relay nucleus in the brain stem, the nucleus of the solitary tract, shows that the response elicited by a taste that has been associated with a toxin is similar to the pattern of activity typical of naturally aversive fl avor. Nausea is critical to the process; damage to the "emetic center" in the area postrema eliminates the sensation of nausea and prevents the formation of the learned taste aversion.Another approach to distinguishing nausea from satiation is to monitor biological variables that occur in association with nausea but not satiation, or vice versa. One such variable is neurohypophyseal hormone secretion. For example, administration of lithium chloride causes nausea in humans and vomiting in monkeys, and stimulates vasopressin secretion in both species. In this example, because elevated plasma vasopressin does not itself cause nausea or vomiting, it can be considered a biological marker of nausea. Curiously, rats secrete the other neurohypophyseal peptide, oxytocin Such experiments are helpful for interpreting the anorexia that occurs when a hormone or neurotransmitter is administered exogenously, but insight into the normal effects of endogenously secreted chemical signals requires an alternative experimental approach. For example, a drug that blocks the effect of an endogenous hormone or neurotransmitter on its receptors could be administered. If the hormone normally functions to reduce food intake, then the blocking agent should increase the size of meals. Such drugs are not yet available for all compounds suspected of being endogenous satiation factors, but experiments using drugs to reduce the activity of CCK, insulin, leptin, and glucagon at their respective receptors found increases in meal size. These observations strongly suggest that these compounds normally function as endogenous satiation factors.Stephen C. meal size and become integrated with CCK, gastric distension, and other factors as satiation signals. This developmental change allows adults to ingest, assess, and respond to foods whose caloric density is not as constant as that of milk. For example, when liquid food is diluted with water, adult rats compensate by increasing the volume consumed in each meal, allowing daily caloric intake to remain stable. This observation reveals that gastric distension is but one of several possible satiation signals in adult rats and that greater distension can be accommodated in circumstances in which the calorie-related satiation signals have diminished.The mechanism by which caloric signals are monitored remains unknown. Although early reports suggested that the stomach monitored caloric nutrients, more recent fi ndings have not supported this hypothesis. For example, when hungry rats were equipped with closed pyloric cuffs to prevent ingested food from entering their small intestine, the rats decreased their food intake in proportion to the volume, and not the caloric content, of intragastric infusions Normally, some ingested food enters the small intestine and is absorbed during the course of a meal, thus allowing postgastric signals to contribute to satiation. In this regard, small amounts of specifi c nutrients infused directly into the duodenum produce a robust suppression of eating that cannot be attributed to gastric factors. It is not clear whether the upper small intestine or a postabsorptive site, or both, is responsible for detecting the administered calories and generating the signals that limit meal size. As discussed earlier, the liver plays a critical role in caloric homeostasis, and the delivery of nutrients absorbed from the small intestine to the liver may be monitored to provide an important postgastric signal for the inhibition of food intake. Consistent with this hypothesis are fi ndings that infusion of glucose or lipids into the hepatic portal vein reduces food intake. Furthermore, such infusions have been found to increase the activity in hepatic vagal afferent fi bers, whereas infusion of fructose into the general circulation no longer reduces food intake in rats after hepatic vagotomy. Collectively, these fi ndings suggest that the liver provides a satiation signal. That signal would disappear as absorption slows, which is when satiety diminishes as well.Intravenously administered glucose reduces food intake but not by as much as the caloric content of the glucose. In contrast, when glucose solution is fed through a tube directly into the stomach, the compensatory reduction in food (calorie) intake is equivalent to the caloric load. In this case, gastric or intestinal signals might contribute to the increased satiety. Note that more insulin is secreted in response to infusion of glucose into the stomach than into a vein, which might contribute to the observed reduction in appetite. In fact, intravenously infused glucose reduces food intake by an equivalent caloric amount when insulin is added to the infusate. Together, these observations suggest that insulin contributes to the satiety effect of glucose whether given by gavage or ingested during a meal. Consistent with this possibility, rats made diabetic by destruction of their pancreatic B cells eat discrete meals more frequently as if they experienced less postprandial satiety (Box 38.2).In addition to providing useful nutrients, consumption of food increases plasma osmolality, yet another factor infl uencing the size of a meal. Increased plasma osmolality stimulates thirst, and for this reason water intake usually accompanies eating. The important point, however, is that food intake is lower during meals when drinking water is not available, a phenomenon known as "dehydration anorexia." Similarly, increased plasma osmolality caused by systemic injection of hypertonic saline reduces food intake in proportion to the administered osmotic load. The well-described osmoreceptors that cause thirst and infl uence vasopressin secretion (Chapter 39) apparently do not mediate this inhibitory effect on food intake, which persists after those forebrain osmoreceptors have been destroyed surgically. Instead, osmoreceptors in the caudal brainstem might mediate the inhibitory effect of increased plasma osmolality on food intake.The control of food intake also is associated with the maintenance of body weight. For example, after a period of food deprivation and forced loss of body weight, animals (including humans) eat larger meals than normal until adiposity returns to pretreatment levels. Conversely, after a period of force feeding, during which the increased daily intake of calories causes weight gain, animals eat smaller meals than normal (or no meals at all) until normal adiposity is restored. Long-term stability of adiposity in adult animals is attributed in part to these compensatory responses to weight fl uctuations that are caused by acute changes in food intake or energy expenditure.Adiposity may indirectly infl uence food intake by modulating how quickly food passes through the gastrointestinal tract, how long nutrients remain in the circulation, or how nutrients interact with the liver. For example, after fasting, less prolonged gastric distension or more rapid absorption and storage of ingested calories would diminish the duration of satiety signals, thereby increasing the frequency of meals. These effects would promote the hyperphagia (overeating) associated with the restoration of body weight in animals that have fasted. Similarly, the satiating properties of ingested food would be reduced by diversions of ingested food calories to the fetus during pregnancy, to milk during lactation, or to skeletal muscle during exposure to cold temperatures, thereby contributing to the hyperphagia associated with each of these conditions. Alternatively, adipose tissue may directly signal the brain to modulate food intake. Although afferent nerves from adipose tissue to brain have been described, most communication from adipose tissue is thought to be mediated by a humoral (circulating) factor. Para bionts, created by surgically joining two animals at the fl ank muscles and skin, support this hypothesis. Vascular interconnection within a Almost half a century ago, At fi rst widely accepted, the glucostatic theory fell into disfavor for several reasons. For one, although eating can be induced by low availability of glucose to the brain, no evidence supports suppression of eating by high glucose availability. In addition, concentrations of blood glucose after administration of large doses of insulin are now known to be far lower than what occurs during a fast or at the normal onset of a meal. Thus, eating in response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia is now considered an "emergency" response that is not relevant to normal feeding. (A similar emergency response occurs after a systemic injection of 2-deoxyglucose induces an acute decrease in cellular glycolysis.) Finally, the prevailing view of the ventromedial hypothalamus as a satiety center has changed considerably since the original formulation of the glucostatic hypothesis. This region of the brain is better regarded as a regulatory control center that infl uences many aspects of hormonal and autonomic function. Diabetic hyperphagia may therefore represent the loss of satiety promoted by insulin or leptin that activates neural systems to inhibit food intake. In contrast, the earlier glucostatic hypothesis would have explained diabetic hyperphagia as a consequence of the loss of insulin's effect on special hypothalamic neurons that mediate satiety.In recent years, evidence has emerged that neurons in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus are sensitive to fl uctuations of glucose as well as to certain fatty acids (especially oleic acid) and amino acids (especially leucine). Neurons in the same area are also sensitive to the adiposity signals leptin and insulin, and manipulations of either nutrients or adiposity signals locally infl uence both food intake and the release of glucose from the liver parabiont is de monstrated when a dye injected into one animal appears in the blood of its partner. Because the nervous systems of the two animals remain independent, any physiologic communication between the animals must occur through the vascular system. When two lean rats were joined parabiotically, each consumed its normal amount of food and maintained its usual body weight. Similar results were obtained when two obese rats with lesions in the ventromedial hypothalamus (see later) were joined together. However, when a lean animal was joined to an obese animal, the result was striking: The lean animal reduced its food intake markedly and consequently lost a considerable amount of weight. These experiments have been interpreted to mean that a circulating factor, secreted in large amounts (proportional to adiposity) by the obese animal, enters the blood of the lean animal and reduces food intake, as if the lean animal was receiving a signal that it was too fat Investigations have identifi ed leptin, the hormone synthesized by adipose tissue, as a key circulating adiposity signal that regulates food intake and body weight. Leptin concentration in plasma is directly proportional to adiposity, and a receptor-mediated transport process passes it into the brain. Animals that lack the gene for synthesizing leptin (ob/ob mice) are hyperphagic and obese, and administering leptin to ob/ob mice, or to normal animals, causes them to eat less and lose weight. Because lower doses of leptin have this action when administered into the ventricles of the brain than when administered systemically, leptin is believed to reduce food intake and body weight via a central site of action. Consistent with this hypothesis, the receptor for leptin has been identifi ed and found to be located within the hypothalamus. Like ob/ob mice, animals with mutated leptin receptors (db/db mice and fatty Zucker rats) are obese (see Box 38.3), but unlike ob/ob mice, they do not respond to exogenous leptin. Hence, leptin appears to function as a negative feedback signal to the brain. When fat stores increase in adipose tissue, more leptin is secreted and enters the brain, causing a greater inhibition of food intake and loss of body fat. When circulating leptin levels are low, feeding and other anabolic responses are disinhibited. In this way, leptin acts to promote the maintenance of a relatively stable body weight over long intervals. The neural circuitry through which leptin inhibits food intake and infl uences caloric homeostasis is discussed later.Insulin provides a second circulating signal that informs the brain of body fat levels. Plasma levels of insulin are directly correlated with adiposity, and, like leptin, insulin is transported through the blood-brain barrier where it can act on insulin receptors in the hypothalamus and other sites. Insulin administered into the brain reduces food intake and body weight, whereas animals that do not secrete insulin are hyperphagic. Of course, severe diabetics do not become obese because their adipocytes cannot store fat in the absence of insulin. Mice lacking insulin receptors on brain cells are both hyperphagic and obese. In short, both leptin and insulin provide blood-borne signals that enter the brain and act on their respective receptors to reduce food intake and body fat.Obesity, the accumulation of greater than normal fat in the body, is increasing throughout the world and creating a major public health problem, in part because it increases the risk for developing cardiovascular disorders, several cancers, type-2 diabetes mellitus, and other metabolic problems, and increases mortality. Obese individuals have both leptin resistance and insulin resistance; that is, although they secrete large amounts of both leptin and insulin in proportion to their adiposity, these signals are relatively ineffective at controlling metabolic parameters. Consequently, considerably more insulin is required to maintain plasma glucose within normal limits, and the brain is insensitive to the catabolic action of both leptin and insulin. The latter is thought to be due to a combination of reduced passage of these hormones through the blood-brain barrier as well as fewer leptin and insulin receptors within the brain itself.Obesity often is defi ned in terms of the body mass index (BMI), which is weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. A BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 is considered normal, with <18.5 being underweight, 25 to 29.9 being overweight, and >30 being obese. A BMI over 40 is morbid obesity. However, the calculation of BMI does not consider the distribution of fat within the body, yet this is recognized as a major determinant of health risk. Abdominal fat (mainly around the viscera) is more metabolically active, more highly vascularized and innervated, and more likely to be a site of infl ammation in the body than subcutaneous fat; abdominal fat (typifi ed by the "pot belly" or "apple" stereotype) therefore carries a much higher health risk than subcutaneous fat (characterized as a "pear" shape). Because of this, assessment of the circumference of the waist (abdomen) at the top of the iliac crest is thought to be a better predictor of health risk than the BMI. By this determination, obesity is defi ned as a waist circumference of >102 cm in men and >88 cm in women.Hypotheses as to why the incidence of obesity has been increasing so dramatically in recent years abound, and often presume some combination of increased availability of energy-dense palatable foods Leptin, the peptide hormone secreted by adipose cells, enters the brain through a receptor-mediated transport system in the brain capillary endothelium. Within the brain, it binds to specifi c leptin receptors that are expressed in discrete populations of neurons. The leptin receptor, termed Ob-R, is a member of the class I cytokine receptor family, a group of structurally similar receptors that act through JAK and STAT intracellular signaling proteins. There is only a single gene for Ob-R, and it is processed differentially by different cells such that many isoforms of the receptor are known. As depicted in Within the brain, Ob-Rb is synthesized in high quantities in various nuclei in the ventral hypothalamus, including the arcuate, ventromedial, and paraventricular nuclei. Ob-Rb is recognized as the receptor that stimulates the synthesis and secretion of a-MSH and inhibits the syn thesis and secretion of neuropeptide Y and agouti-related peptide in the arcuate nucleus. Other isoforms, with shorter intracellular segments, are localized in other brain areas and in the choroid plexus. They are thought to mediate activities locally at the cell membrane such as the movement of molecules through the membrane.Many spontaneously occurring mutations of the leptin receptor have been identifi ed ( Stephen C. There are many isoforms of the leptin receptor (Ob-R). All have the same extracellular segment that binds with leptin, such that variations are in the length of the intracellular segment. Most tissues synthesize one or another "short" isoform that binds leptin and initiates cellular events locally near the cell membrane. Only the long form (Ob-Rb) is capable of triggering intracellular signaling cascades that can alter nuclear transcription. Several mutations that shorten the Ob-R occur in mice. These mice, called db/db, are all hyperphagic and obese. Two mutations of the Ob-R also have been identifi ed in rats, and both also result in obesity. Fatty Zucker (fa/fa) rats have single amino acid substitution in the extracellular segment of Ob-R, whereas Koletsky rats have a truncated receptor.and/or decreased average energy expenditure. One intriguing possibility is that the bacteria in the gastrointestinal (GI) system, termed the microbiota, are an important factor. Among other actions, these bacteria determine the proportion of ingested nutrients that actually are absorbed into the body. Recent reports indicate that the GI tracts of some obese humans and obese mice have a higher proportion of bacteria of the phylum Firmucites than the GI tracts of lean individuals; those bacteria express enzymes that break down certain complex carbohydrates, enabling the obese individuals to extract and absorb more calories from what they have eaten. Importantly, inoculation of the guts of lean mice with the microbiota from obese mice resulted in the lean mice losing fewer calories in their feces and gaining slightly more weight than controls inoculated with microbiota from lean mice Three effects of eating limit the size of an ongoing meal: gastric distension (potentiated by CCK), postgastric detection of calories (via satiety signals such as CCK, perhaps potentiated in the liver by insulin), and increased plasma osmolality. These signals reach the brain through visceral afferent fi bers (especially those traveling in the vagus nerve) and the circulatory system. Meal size invariably increases after the inhibitory effects are experimentally removed by blocking the detection of gastric stretch or of CCK, diluting the food with noncaloric material, or rehydrating the animal. Inhibition appears to be integrated so that as one effect diminishes (e.g., the signal associated with gastric distension), another increases (e.g., the signal associated with the postabsorptive delivery of calories and insulin to the liver), thereby maintaining satiety and prolonging the interval between meals. When the satiety signals disappear, hunger emerges and stimulates initiation of another meal.Food intake is also normally linked closely with body weight. In experimental animals, periods of starvation or forced feeding are followed by self-regulated compensatory changes in eating patterns until prior body size is regained. Links between body weight and food intake can be mediated indirectly by altered gastrointestinal motility and absorption as well as by the blood-borne, centrally active hormones, leptin and insulin.Early theories of the control of food intake focused on signals derived from stomach and blood. Peripheral factors, such as the concentration of glucose in the blood, were plausibly associated with food intake and were accessible to experimentation. Theories involving the brain emerged after development of a stereotaxic instrument that enabled discrete lesions of the cerebrum to be made in laboratory animals, permitting evaluation of ideas about brain function The strength of the traditional dual center model, in which one center mediates hunger and the other satiety, was that it provided a simple answer to the question of how the brain controls intake of food. The principal limitation of the model, however, was that it could not answer the next level of questions: What signals control individual meals? How are these signals integrated with physiological aspects of caloric homeostasis, including long-term maintenance of body weight? What is the infl uence of other neural sites and systems in the brain? How are excitatory and inhibitory infl uences on eating integrated? How are behaviors, such as motivation and reinforcement, explained? Investigators are addressing these and related questions, but they now usually take a perspective that does not presume the existence of brain centers mediating hunger and satiety.In addition to causing hyperphagia, VMH lesions profoundly reduce sympathetic tone and increase parasympathetic tone and vagal refl exes. For example, the high concentration of insulin in animals with VMH lesions is not simply a secondary consequence of hyperphagia but occurs even when food intake is limited. Because of the change in autonomic tone, caloric equilibrium in adipose tissue shifts away from lipolysis and toward lipogenesis, thereby allowing more rapid storage of ingested calories after a meal. Increased parasympathetic activity also allows faster gastric emptying. Importantly, VMH lesions do not cause loss of satiety. Meal sizes continue to correlate with postmeal intervals, but the interval after a meal of any size is shorter in animals with VMH lesions than in control animals.Because the duration of their postprandial satiety signals is shorter than normal, rats with VMH lesions eat more frequent meals. They remain hyperphagic until the equilibrium between lipogenesis and lipolysis is reestablished in adipocytes. For this to happen, triglyceride stores must accumulate in the cells to levels suffi cient to create insulin resistance, whereupon lipogenesis subsides. Meals are eaten less frequently, and daily food intake is reduced. The animal maintains its obese state as if it had a new "set point" for body weight. Thus, after obese rats with VMH lesions have been deprived of food and forced to lose weight, hyperphagia reoccurs until high adiposity is reattained. Similarly, when neurologically normal rats are overfed and become obese prior to receiving a lesion of the VMH, they are not hyperphagic after the lesion but rather eat to maintain their elevated weight.In sum, rats gain body fat after VMH lesions, and as fat accumulates the duration of satiety after meals increases. This explanation contrasts with early hypotheses that body weight increased after VMH lesions because animals became obligatorily hyperphagic. The primary phenomenon is now recognized as a change in autonomic tone to promote vagal refl exes and fat storage. Because the change in autonomic tone is observed even when increased food intake is prevented, hyperphagia cannot be the primary phenomenon. The key element appears to be the chronic, neurally stimulated increase in insulin secretion. When the increased insulin secretion is prevented by denervating the pancreas, obesity does not develop and hyperphagia is attenuated greatly.In contrast to VMH lesions, rats with large VLH lesions do not eat (to the point of starvation). However, they also do not drink water when dehydrated, move about in their cages, or respond to diverse stimulation. In other words, the most prominent abnormalities in these rats are akinesia and sensory neglect. In this respect, rats with VLH lesions resemble human patients with Parkinson's disease, a neurological disorder that has been attributed to the degeneration of dopaminecontaining neurons of the nigrostriatal bundle (see Chapters 30 and 31). Dopaminergic fi bers course through the internal capsule just lateral to the VLH as they ascend from the ventral mesencephalon to the striatum along the medial forebrain bundle (Chapter 43). Large electrolytic lesions of the VLH area interrupt these dopaminergic fi bers. More selective damage to the dopaminergic neurons by intracerebral administration of the neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine also produces akinesia and sensory neglect in association with loss of food intake, and it does so without disturbing parasympathetic refl exes. Thus, the aphagia induced by large VLH lesions does not result from damage to a putative hunger center in the brain but instead refl ects a more general disruption of movement and sensorimotor integration The ability of brain circuitry to control food intake initially was based on the consequences of stereotaxic lesions of ventromedial and ventrolateral hypothalamic nuclei leading to hyperphagia or aphagia,respectively. Subsequent studies revealed that each lesion also induces changes in gastrointestinal function and in the equilibrium between lipolysis and lipogenesis in adipocytes. In addition, these nuclei help regulate body weight through infl uences on spontaneous mobility and sensory responsivity to food-derived stimuli. The nucleus of the solitary tract also relays important visceral sensory cues on gastrointestinal fi ll that can further infl uence food intake.Although the details of the central control of food intake are incompletely understood, many neuropeptides have been implicated. To simplify the discussion, we focus on two broad categories of neuropeptides: those that are mainly anabolic and those that are mainly catabolic. Both of these subgroups in turn are modifi ed by multiple infl uences, including satiety signals, adiposity signals, experience, habit, emotional state, the social situation, and so on. Anabolic peptides cause increased eating, decreased energy expenditure, and, when chronically elevated, increased body fat accumulation. Catabolic peptides reduce food intake, increase energy expenditure, and lead to loss of body fat. The amount of body fat is signaled to the brain by leptin and insulin. Receptors for both peptides are located (among other sites) in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus on two distinct groups of neurons. The fi rst group of arcuate neurons synthesizes the neuropeptides, a-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (a-MSH) and cocaine-amphetamine-related transcript (CART); these neurons are activated by leptin and insulin. a-MSH and CART are potent catabolic peptides, and when either is administered locally into the third cerebral ventricle, animals eat less food, have increased energy expenditure, and lose weight The other type of arcuate neuron infl uenced by adiposity signals synthesizes the neuropeptides, neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agouti-related protein (AgRP). Both peptides are potent anabolic compounds in that the administration of either into the third ventricle results in hyperphagia, reduced energy expenditure, and weight gain. Although NPY is synthesized in many areas of the brain, AgRP synthesis is limited to the arcuate nucleus. Neurons containing NPY and AgRP express receptors for both leptin and insulin, and the local administration of either insulin or leptin near the arcuate nucleus reduces the synthesis of both NPY and AgRP. Hence, adiposity signals exert net catabolic effects through the joint mechanisms of stimulating a-MSH/CART neurons and simultaneously inhibiting NPY/AgRP neurons. For all these reasons, the arcuate nucleus can be considered to be the brain's sense organ that detects body adiposity by monitoring the levels of leptin and insulin. In turn, axons from these two groups of arcuate neurons innervate many other hypothalamic nuclei as they modulate aspects of caloric homeostasis.A particularly important tract includes NPYcontaining axons that project from the arcuate nucleus to the PVN. The PVN expresses receptors for NPY, and careful mapping studies have identifi ed the PVN as the most sensitive site to the orexigenic effect of exogenously administered NPY. Consistent with this fi nding, when antisense oligonucleotides to NPY receptors are given locally within the PVN, rats that have been deprived of food eat less than they usually would. Among the numerous sites that synthesize NPY within the brain, only those in the arcuate nucleus are sensitive to changes of food intake as signaled by leptin and insulin . NPY mRNA is increased in the arcuate nucleus when animals are fasted and returns to baseline upon refeeding. Fasting also increases the levels of NPY in axon terminals in the PVN and increases secretion of NPY within the PVN. Hence, the fasted animal is primed to eat more food due in part to the action of elevated NPY in the area of the PVN. Circulating insulin and leptin are decreased during fasting, and local administration of either into the brain of a fasted rat lowers the elevation of NPY mRNA in the arcuate nucleus and lowers the amount of food eaten by food-deprived rats . Hence, the metabolic state, as refl ected by leptin and insulin, has a marked infl uence on arcuate NPY-containing neurons and consequently on neural pathways that infl uence energy intake and expenditure. Endogenous levels of NPY in the arcuate-PVN system normally peak when daylight ends and nocturnal activity begins The other neuropeptide synthesized in NPY neurons in the arcuate nucleus, AgRP, is an endogenous antagonist of MC3 and MC4 receptors In sum, the arcuate nucleus appears to be a chemosensor in the brain that detects body adiposity by means of insulin and leptin receptors. One type of arcuate neuron synthesizes peptide transmitters (a-MSH and CART) having a net catabolic effect, whereas another type synthesizes peptide transmitters (NPY and AgRP) with a net anabolic effect. Both types of neuron project to other hypothalamic areas where they infl uence specifi c aspects of caloric homeostasis.Several newly discovered neuropeptides important in the control of caloric homeostasis are synthesized in the VLH, including orexin A and melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) Oxytocin is a peptide synthesized in the PVN and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus and is secreted from the posterior lobe of the pituitary. In the systemic circulation of female mammals, this hormone is well known for stimulating uterine contractions for parturition and stimulating milk let-down in mammary glands during lactation. However, the hypothalamus and pituitary of males contain as much oxytocin as those of females; therefore, the peptide has long been suspected of being secreted in other circumstances and having additional functions. In fact, research has revealed that gastric distension, CCK administration, and plasma hyperosmolality, treatments that decrease food intake in rats, elicit pituitary oxytocin secretion in male and female rats. In addition, increases in plasma concentrations of oxytocin correlate highly with observed decreases in food intake.Although observations were consistent with oxytocin being an appetite suppressant, later experiments showed that this was not the case: Systemic administration of oxytocin does not affect food intake. Instead, the reduced food intake seen after treatment with CCK or hypertonic saline appears to be mediated by oxytocin secreted from neurons whose cell bodies are located in the hypothalamic PVN but whose axons project within the central nervous system rather than to the pituitary gland. Consistent with this hypothesis, central injection of oxytocin into the cerebral ventricles (icv) decreases food intake in rats, an effect that is blocked by icv pretreatment of the animals with an oxytocin receptor antagonist. More to the point, the effects of exogenous CCK and hypertonic saline on food intake are blunted by icv pretreatment with an oxytocin receptor antagonist. A summary of some of the hypothalamic peptides that modulate food intake is depicted in Stress is also well known to decrease food intake in animals, and various stressors activate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. A key mediator of this effect is corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which is synthesized and secreted from the PVN. CRH stimulates the secretion of ACTH from the anterior pituitary, and ACTH in turn elicits steroid hormone secretion from the adrenal cortex (see Chapter 40). In rats, icv injection of CRH decreases food intake in the absence of stress and in association with oxytocin secretion from the posterior pituitary. In addition, icv pretreatment with an oxytocin receptor antagonist eliminates CRH-induced inhibition of food intake. These fi ndings are consistent with central oxytocinergic neurons mediating the inhibition of food intake that occurs during stress. Such inhibitory effects on eating would complement the known inhibitory effects of central oxytocin on gastric motility and emptying.  38.7 Hypothalamic neuropeptides that infl uence caloric homeostasis. The adiposity hormones, leptin and insulin, are transported through the blood-brain barrier and infl uence neurons in the arcuate nucleus (ARC). ARC neurons that synthesize and release NPY and AgRP are inhibited by adiposity signals, whereas ARC neurons that synthesize and release a-MSH and CART are stimulated by adiposity signals. NPY/AgRP neurons are inhibitory to the PVN and stimulatory to the LHA, whereas a-MSH/CART neurons are stimulatory of the PVN and inhibitory of the LHA. The PVN in turn has a net catabolic action, whereas the LHA has a net anabolic action.Two additional features of these fi ndings deserve note. First, despite prominent pituitary oxytocin secretion, central oxytocinergic pathways are not stimulated by suckling. Therefore, nursing does not inevitably reduce food intake in dams; in fact, lactating rats are hyperphagic in association with the substantial loss of calories through milk. Second, because the various stimuli for oxytocin release are not related to caloric homeostasis, oxytocin is not a factor in the termination of normal meals; in fact, oxytocin is not secreted by rats during meals taken ad libitum.The NST and the adjacent area postrema in the brain stem receive sensory fi bers from gustatory receptors in the mouth and throat (see Chapter 24), as well as afferent information from the stomach, small intestine, pancreas, and liver. In the central control of food intake, these linked brain stem sites likely are where sensory input from the viscera is fi rst integrated with input from taste buds. This sensory information is relayed along prominent neural projections from the brain stem to the hypothalamus, amygdala, and other portions of the limbic system, as well as to the thalamus and gustatory cortex. Reciprocal neural connections to the brain stem from these rostral sites allow emotion and cognitive function to infl uence the control of eating. Complementary and linked efferent elements participate in the central control of the gastrointestinal tract and liver, and of autonomic function generally.Evidence of the control of the brain stem over food intake comes from investigations of the chronic decerebrate rat in which all axonal connections between the caudal brain stem and the forebrain are severed at the midcollicular level of the midbrain Other observations provide additional support for an important role of the brain stem in the control of meal size. When the area postrema is ablated, rats eat larger meals than normal, although total daily food intake is normal; that is, they compensate for their large meals by eating less frequently, indicating that long-term controls of food intake are not impaired. A similar effect is seen in rats pretreated with capsaicin, a neurotoxin that destroys most gastric afferent vagal axons, eliminating the food intake-reducing effects of CCK and presumably damaging the signal of gastric distension.To provide a biological context within which to consider the purpose of eating and the fate of ingested food, we began this chapter with a description of the physiology of caloric homeostasis. Two principles were emphasized. First, meal size is determined by the integrated effects of several acute stimuli. Delivery of calories to the stomach and small intestine upon food consumption and postabsorptive delivery of nutrients to the liver elicit sensory neural signals from the stomach and the liver, respectively, to the brain stem. Second, food intake is also infl uenced by chronic signals associated with body adiposity. Adiposity indirectly affects gastric and hepatic signals of satiety. In addition, humoral signals proportional to adiposity enter the brain and affect food intake. One signal emanates from adipose tissue itself (i.e., leptin), and the other comes from the pancreas (i.e., insulin). These two peptides appear to be important in the central control of food intake; they modulate the response of the brain to the acute neural signals that affect food intake.These neural and humoral signals are related to caloric homeostasis and are inhibitory in nature. During meals, they combine to stop ongoing ingestion; later, when these signals disappear in the postabsorptive state, new meals begin. Other inhibitory signals are unrelated to caloric homeostasis yet can have a pronounced effect on the cessation of eating. These signals include gastric distension, toxins (in the food or body), and dehydration.The central nervous system exerts control over eating at many levels. The spinal cord and brain stem infl uence all aspects of caloric homeostasis via the autonomic nervous system. The hypothalamus and limbic forebrain receive signals about ingested food and body adiposity and integrate them with information about the taste of the food, the memory of that food, the experience of previous meals, the competition of other desires, and aspects of the environment. Thus, the central control of eating involves many areas of the central nervous system in the collective maintenance of caloric homeostasis. In short, food intake is a simple behavior infl uenced by a complex array of stimuli and situational variables, the details of which remain to be fully understood.Body fl uids are the watery matrix in which the biochemical reactions of cellular metabolism occur. The concentration of substrates in cellular fl uid is a key factor in determining the rate at which those reactions take place. All tissues depend on circulating blood to deliver the nutrients needed to support cellular metabolism and to carry away unwanted metabolites for excretion. Thus, the maintenance of solute concentrations or osmolalities-osmotic homeostasis-and the regulation of plasma volume-volume homeostasis-are essential functions in the physiology of animals.When normal body fl uid osmolality or plasma volume is threatened, various physiological and behavioral responses are stimulated to maintain or restore the basal state adaptively. For example, during water deprivation, animals decrease water lost in urine to prevent dehydration from worsening and consume water to replace the fl uid they have lost. Similarly, hemorrhage stimulates the urinary conservation of water and sodium, as well as the ingestion of water and NaCl. Water retention and sodium retention are accomplished through actions of the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP) and the antinatriuretic hormone aldosterone, whereas water ingestion and NaCl ingestion are motivated by thirst and salt appetite. These complementary responses are mediated and coordinated by the brain.This chapter describes the various mechanisms by which the signals for fl uid homeostasis are detected and integrated by the central nervous system. However, we fi rst present a brief overview of body fl uid physiology to provide a context in which to consider the regulated functions.Water is the largest constituent of the body. It contributes 55 to 65% of the body weight of animals, including humans, varying mostly in relation to the amount of body fat. Total body water is distributed between intracellular fl uid (ICF) and extracellular fl uid (ECF) compartments, with approximately two-thirds in the former and one-third in the latter. The ECF can be further subdivided into the interstitial fl uid surrounding the cells and the intravascular fl uid within blood vessels. The intravascular fl uid, the plasma (or serum) of blood, averages 7 to 8% of total body water, or 20 to 25% of the ECF.Fluid compartments differ not only in their volumes, but also in the solutes they contain. Specifi cally, membrane-bound Na + -K + pumps move Na + outside the cells and K + inside. Despite the differences in solute composition, the osmotic pressure, which refl ects the concentrations of all solutes in a fl uid compartment, is equivalent between ECF and ICF compartments. This equilibrium occurs because water is driven across cell membranes by osmosis from a relatively dilute compartment into one with a higher solute concentration until the osmotic pressures are equivalent on both sides of the cell membrane.The distribution of fl uid between intravascular and interstitial fl uid compartments is determined by a Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition balance between the hydrostatic pressure of the blood, which is maintained by cardiac output and arteriolar vasoconstriction, and the opposing osmotic pressure contributed by plasma proteins. Although those proteins contribute only 1 to 2% to overall plasma osmolality, the permeability of capillary membranes to such large molecules is low; therefore, proteins exert a pressure differential (of approximately 15-20 mm Hg), called the colloid osmotic Blood pressure also is maintained by two other mechanisms intrinsic to the cardiovascular system. First, although the arteries that receive the cardiac output of blood have thick walls to preserve blood pressure, the veins are thin-walled, distensible vessels. After a moderate hemorrhage, veins collapse, redistributing blood to arteries that cannot collapse and thus remain full. Consequently, arterial blood pressure is not compromised, and the blood defi cit occurs primarily on the venous side of the circulation. Conversely, fl uid accumulates in the veins when blood volume is expanded, again without much effect on arterial blood pressure. This property is called the capacitance or compliance of the vascular system. Second, the fi ltration of blood in the glomeruli of the kidneys is determined in large part by blood pressure in the renal arteries. A drop in blood pressure reduces the glomerular fi ltration rate (GFR) and decreases urine formation, whereas a rise in blood pressure elevates GFR and promotes urinary fl uid loss. This normal function of the kidneys is so effi cient that the development of hypertension always implicates renal dysfunction as a contributing factor because the kidneys failed to adjust to the elevated blood pressure by increasing fl uid excretion in urine.Body fl uid homeostasis is directed at achieving stability in the osmolality of body fl uids and the volume of plasma. Such homeostatic regulation is promoted by several mechanisms intrinsic to the physiology of body fl uids and the cardiovascular system. Nevertheless, changes in body fl uid osmolality and plasma volume may be so large that additional mechanisms must be recruited to maintain homeostasis. These other responses involve the central control of water and sodium excretion in urine through the actions of specifi c hormones, and the central control of water and NaCl consumption motivated by thirst and salt appetite.Osmolality is an expression of concentration-that is, a ratio of the total amount of solute dissolved in a given weight of water: solute(osmoles) water (kilograms) .Dehydration and the consequent need for water occur whenever this ratio is elevated, whether by a decrease in its denominator or by an increase in its numerator. In fact, both changes occur naturally and transfer. At the arteriolar end of the capillary, the difference between the intravascular hydrostatic pressure (P c ) and the interstitial hydrostatic pressure (P i ) exceeds the oppositely oriented difference between the intravascular oncotic pressure (p c ) and the interstitial oncotic pressure (p i ); the resultant pressure gradient drives capillary fl uid into the interstitial space (J v1 ). As fl uid leaves the capillary, P c decreases due to fl uid loss and p c increases due to hemoconcentration. Consequently, at the venous end of the capillary, interstitial fl uid is pulled back into the vascular space (J V2 ). Numerical values indicate approximate net pressure differences (in mm Hg) between intravascular and interstitial spaces. Relative sizes of P and p are indicated by arrow length. Note that fl uid accumulating in the interstitial space ultimately returns to the blood via the lymphatic system (not shown).often: Body water decreases as a result of water deprivation or the loss of dilute fl uids to accomplish evaporative cooling (e.g., sweating) and increases as a result of solute load (e.g., the consumption of sodium as NaCl in foods). The water loss associated with dehydration is borne by the ECF and the ICF in proportion to their sizes because the osmolality of fl uid in the two compartments remains in equilibrium. In contrast, the increase in plasma osmolality that results from a solute load results only in cellular dehydration because the water leaving cells by osmosis expands ECF volume. Thus, a solute load is a more abrupt, less complex treatment than water deprivation for stimulating AVP secretion and thirst, the two main osmoregulatory responses of the brain.AVP is a nine amino acid peptide that is synthesized in the magnocellular neurons in the supraoptic nucleus (SON) and the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus. The peptide is cleaved enzymatically from its prohormone and transported along axons projecting from the hypothalamus to the nearby posterior lobe of the pituitary gland (neurohypophysis). There, AVP is stored within neurosecretory granules until specifi c stimuli, such as an increase in the effective osmolality of body fl uids, activate its secretion into the bloodstream. The importance of AVP in maintaining water balance is underscored by the fact that its stores in the pituitary contain suffi cient hormone to enable maximal antidiuresis when dehydration is sustained for more than a week.The circulating hormone acts on a subset of AVP receptors (the V 2 subtype) in the kidney to increase water permeability of the collecting ducts of nephrons through insertion of water channels, called aquaporins, into the apical membranes of tubular epithelial cells. Antidiuresis occurs when water moves out of the distal convoluted tubule and collecting duct by osmosis. As secondary responses to the increased net water reabsorption, urine fl ow decreases and urine osmolality increases. See Box 39.1 for more on renal water channels Water conservation by the kidney is dependent on its ability to concentrate the urine. Urine is concentrated through the combined actions of the loop of Henle and the collecting duct of the kidney. The loop of Henle generates a high osmolality in the renal medulla via a mechanism known as the countercurrent multiplier system. AVP acts in the collecting duct to increase water permeability, thereby allowing osmotic equilibration between the urine and the hypertonic interstitium of the renal medulla. The net effect of this process is to extract water from the urine into the medullary interstitial blood vessels, resulting in increased urine concentration and decreased urine volume.AVP produces antidiuresis by virtue of its effects on the epithelial principal cells of the collecting duct in the kidney, which are endowed with AVP receptors of the V 2 type. It has long been known that binding of AVP to G protein-coupled V 2 receptors causes cAMP generation via activation of adenylate cyclase. However, the intracellular mechanisms responsible for the subsequent increased water reabsorption across the collecting duct cells have been elucidated only recently following the discovery of aquaporins, which are a widely expressed family of water channels that facilitate rapid water transport across cell membranes.Many different aquaporin water channels are expressed in various body tissues, including the brain. Several of these channels have been localized in the kidney. Aquaporin-1 is expressed constitutively in the proximal tubule and thin descending limb of the loop of Henle and is believed to be responsible for reabsorption of a large fraction of the water fi ltered by the glomerulus. The other three water channels, aquaporin-2, -3, and -4, are expressed in collecting duct principal cells, target cells for the action of AVP to regulate collecting duct water permeability. Aquaporin-2 is the only water channel known to be expressed in the apical membrane (i.e., the side bordering the tubular lumen, through which urine fl ows) of collecting duct principal cells and is also abundant in intracellular vesicles located below the apical membrane. Aquaporin-2 is the major AVP-regulated water channel and mediates water transport across the apical plasma membrane of the principal cells of the collecting ducts. In contrast, aquaporins-3 and -4 are expressed at high levels in the basolateral plasma membranes (i.e., the side bordering the blood) of principal cells and are responsible for the constitutively high water permeability of the basolateral plasma membrane.There are at least two ways by which AVP regulates osmotic water permeability in the collecting duct: shortterm and long-term regulation Accompanying the excretion of concentrated urine is reabsorption of conserved water, which can considerably dilute remaining body fl uids. Thirst, and the water intake it provokes, is a much more rapid and less limited response to dehydration than antidiuresis. Thirst may be defi ned as a strong motivation to seek, to obtain, and to consume water in response to defi cits in body fl uids. Like AVP secretion, thirst can be stimulated by cellular dehydration caused by increases in the effective osmolality of ECF Also like AVP secretion, water intake increases linearly in proportion to increases in the effective osmolality of ECF. The dilution of body fl uids by ingested water complements the retention of water that occurs during antidiuresis, and both responses occur when drinking water is available. However, there may be marked individual differences in whether dehydrated subjects respond to their need for water promptly by drinking, or more slowly by increasing renal water conservation All body cells lose water by osmosis when the effective osmolality of ECF is increased. Thus, cells that provoke AVP secretion and thirst do not have unique osmosensitive properties (unlike retinal photoreceptor cells, e.g., which are uniquely responsive to light). Instead, the exceptional feature of osmoreceptor cells is thought to be their neural circuitry, which activates the central systems for AVP secretion and thirst when the cells are dehydrated.Destruction of osmoreceptor neurons should eliminate detection of increased plasma osmolality and thus the AVP secretion and thirst responses that are elicited by dehydration. In fact, ample research has confi rmed that certain brain lesions eliminate AVP secretion and thirst responses. Such studies also have revealed that osmoreceptor cells The neural pathways connecting the OVLT with magnocellular AVP-secreting cells in the hypothalamic SON and PVN have been identifi ed, whereas the neural circuits in the forebrain that control thirst are less well known. Early reports identifi ed the lateral hypothalamus as a "thirst center" because its destruction in rats eliminated the drinking response, but not the associated AVP secretion, to increased osmolality of body fl uids. However, later investigations showed that the critical damage was not to hypothalamic cells but to dopamine-containing fi bers that coursed through the area. The induced disruption of behavior was not The disease diabetes insipidus (DI), in which the secretion of AVP is impaired or absent, illustrates the crucial role of AVP in controlling the volume of water in the body. An eighteenth century English physician, Thomas Willis, named the disease diabetes insipidus, or insipid urine, to distinguish it from diabetes mellitus, or sweet urine, in which abnormally high concentrations of glucose in the blood result in glucose appearing in the urine.AVP is the only known antidiuretic substance in the body. In its absence, the kidney is unable to concentrate urine maximally to conserve water. The result is a continued excretion of copious amounts of very dilute urine. Patients with severe cases of DI, in whom the ability to excrete AVP is completely lost, can excrete up to 25 liters of urine each day. Such patients urinate almost hourly, which renders the completion of even simple tasks and activities of daily living, including sleeping, exceedingly diffi cult.Patients with DI can quickly become dehydrated if their urinary fl uid losses are not replaced by drinking water. Fortunately, thirst remains intact in most patients with DI because lesions that destroy the magnocellular neurons in the SON and PVN that synthesize AVP generally leave intact the osmoreceptors in the anterior hypothalamus as well as the higher brain centers that control thirst. Consequently, extreme thirst is one of the hallmarks of this disease, leading to the characteristic symptoms of polydipsia (excessive drinking) and polyuria (excessive urination). If drinking water is unavailable, or if a person with DI is unable to drink, then the unreplaced urinary water loss leads to dehydration and death in the absence of medical intervention.DI can be caused when tumors and infi ltrative diseases of the hypothalamus destroy the magnocellular neurons that produce AVP. Because four nuclei contain magnocellular neurons, and 10 to 20% of AVP-producing neurons are suffi cient for normal urine concentration, brain lesions that cause DI are generally large. Less commonly, DI is idiopathic (of unknown cause), most likely from an autoimmune basis. DI can also be genetic, transmitted as an autosomal-dominant trait. Some patients with DI do not have any defect in AVP secretion but rather have defects in the V 2 AVP receptors in the kidney that respond to circulating AVP. These cases are called nephrogenic (of kidney origin) DI.The treatment for DI, like that of other endocrine deficiency disorders, is replacement of the defi cient hormone, in this case AVP. The short half-life of AVP in the circulation allows mammals to have minute-to-minute control of their urine output. However, longer acting synthetic analogs of AVP are more convenient for treatment because they need not be taken as frequently as short-acting drugs Water deprivation and systemic administration of hypertonic saline each increases the effective osmolality of circulating plasma and thereby activates forebrain osmoreceptor cells. Animals drink water, but 10 to 20 min elapse before ingested water is absorbed into the circulation and affects plasma osmolality. However, many species (e.g., dogs, humans) drink water very quickly, stopping long before the ingested water actually rehydrates them. What are the biological mechanisms that mediate this anticipatory satiety?One possibility is that a neural message is communicated from the oropharynx to the brain in association with the act of swallowing. Thus, the more animals drink and swallow, the greater the inhibition of thirst, even before the water is absorbed. In fact, evidence is consistent with metered fl uid consumption providing a preliminary signal of satiety. The main experiments were done in dogs with implanted gastric fi stulas These observations are consistent with a temporary satiety being produced by the act of water consumption, with a more long-lasting satiety occurring only after absorption of the ingested water and rehydration of the dog. AVP secretion is affected in parallel, showing that physiological and behavioral components of osmoregulation are infl uenced similarly. Ingestion of a concentrated NaCl solution instead of water produces the same temporary satiety and inhibition of AVP secretion, but after the saline is absorbed, the increase in plasma osmolality stimulates more drinking and AVP secretion than occurred at fi rst. In similar experiments, people respond the same way.Animals drink appropriate amounts perhaps because they have learned from previous experiences how much to drink to relieve their thirst. After all, when we are thirsty, we fi ll a glass to a volume that, based on previous experience, we think will be suffi cient for satiety. No doubt animals behave equivalently. Alternatively, this drinking response may not be learned, and instead appropriate neural circuits linking the act of swallowing with satiety may be present at birth.Research indicates that rats also obtain early feedback from drinking but do so by a different mechanism. In one study, rats were infused intravenously with a hypertonic NaCl solution to stimulate AVP secretion When body fl uid is hyperosmoler, adaptive behavior includes not only drinking and conserving water (thereby increasing the denominator in the ratio that represents body fl uid osmolality), but also excreting NaCl and avoiding the consumption of additional osmolytes (thereby decreasing the numerator of that ratio). Endogenous natriuretic agents promote urinary sodium loss after an administered NaCl load or a period of imposed water deprivation. One such agent (OT). The vascular organ of the lamina terminalis (OVLT) is especially sensitive to hyperosmolality. Hyperosmolality also activates other neurons in the anterior hypothalamus, such as those in the subfornical organ (SFO) and median preoptic nucleus (MnPO), and magnocellular neurons, which are intrinsically osmosensitive. Circulating angiotensin II (AII) activates neurons of the SFO, an essential site of AII action, as well as cells throughout the lamina terminalis and MnPO. In response to hyperosmolality or AII, projections from the SFO and OVLT to the MnPO activate excitatory and inhibitory interneurons that project to the supraoptic nucleus (SON) and paraventricular nucleus (PVN) to modulate direct inputs to these areas from the circumventricular organs. Cholecystokinin (CCK) acts primarily on gastric vagal afferents that terminate in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NST), but at higher doses it can also act at the area postrema (AP). Although neurons apparently are activated in the ventrolateral medulla (VLM) and NST, most oxytocin secretion appears to be stimulated by monosynaptic projections from A2/C2 cells, and possibly also noncatecholaminergic somatostatin/inhibin b cells, of the NST. Baroreceptor-mediated stimuli, such as hypovolemia and hypotension, are more complex. The major projection to magnocellular AVP neurons appears to arise from A1 cells of the VLM that are activated by excitatory interneurons from the NST. Other areas, such as the parabrachial nucleus (PBN), may contribute multisynaptic projections. Cranial nerves IX and X, which terminate in the NST, also contribute input to magnocellular AVP neurons. It is unclear whether baroreceptor-mediated secretion of oxytocin results from projections from VLM neurons or from NST neurons. AC, anterior commissure; OC, optic chiasm; PIT, anterior pituitary.is the hormone atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), which is synthesized in the atria of the heart and released when increased intravascular volume distends the atria. Another is the hormone oxytocin. Like AVP, oxytocin is synthesized in magnocellular neurons in the PVN and SON and secreted from the posterior pituitary in proportion to induced hyperosmolality Salt loads are also known to decrease the intake of osmolytes, whether in the form of NaCl solution or food, complementing the stimulation of thirst and the secretion of AVP and oxytocin. However, because destruction of the OVLT eliminates the two latter effects but not the dehydration-induced reduction in NaCl intake, osmo-or Na + receptors located outside the basal forebrain must mediate the inhibition of NaCl and food intake. Possible sites for such cells include the hepatic portal vein and the area postrema, both of which have been suspected of having Na + receptor functions. In addition, cells in the hepatic portal vein are well situated to detect the sodium content of ingested food and to modulate its intake accordingly.Osmoregulation is required not only under conditions of dehydration, but also during periods of acute overhydration and hypoosmolality, as may result when beverages are consumed in excess of water cFos was named for its homology to an FBR osteogenic sarcoma virus protein, v-fos. The cFos protein is the product of the c-fos gene, which belongs to a family of genes whose products are involved in the regulation of gene transcription. The protein has a "leucine zipper" motif that promotes dimerization (pairing) with other regulatory proteins, most commonly with members of the Jun family. Genes encoding Jun and Fos are immediateearly genes (IEGs), the fi rst genes expressed in response to activation of cells. Jun and Fos protein dimers bind specifi c DNA sequences (e.g., APS sites) to modulate the expression of genes expressed later.The precise relationship between cFos expression and transcription of later gene products remains uncertain for most neural systems. However, many neurons are known to express cFos only on synaptic activation; therefore, the mRNA or protein product (cFos) of the c-fos gene can be used as a marker of neuronal activation in the brain. The protein product is especially useful because it is detected easily by antibodies directed against cFos. This immunohistochemical staining allows investigators to determine which neurons are activated in the brain in response to specifi c stimuli given to experimental animals.Many of the initial studies simply localized the IEG expression to magnocellular neurons in the SON and PVN, but later studies used antibodies against proteins located in cytoplasm, along with the antibody against IEG products, and showed that the IEG products were located in the nucleus Immunocytochemical detection of cFos expression, phenotypic characterization of activated cells, and standard techniques of tract tracing together have enabled investigators to map brain circuits activated by specifi c stimuli.needs. Such consumption occurs not because of thirst but, for example, because of the palatability of or chemical substances in the beverages (e.g., caffeine, alcohol). Unlike excess food, which is stored as triglycerides in adipose tissue, excess water is not stored for later use but instead is excreted in urine. When plasma osmolality is below normal, circulating levels of AVP are reduced, and in consequence, the kidneys excrete dilute urine and thereby raise plasma osmolality. The major behavioral contribution of osmotic dilution to osmoregulation is inhibition of free water intake; the ingestion of osmolytes in food and NaCl is not stimulated by osmotic dilution.Osmoregulation in animals and humans is accomplished by a combination of physiological responses to dehydration, resulting in antidiuresis and natriuresis, and the behavioral response of increased water intake. Osmoreceptor cells critical for mediating these functions have been identifi ed in the basal forebrain. These neurons respond to very small increases in plasma osmolality, and the effector systems they control correct any increase in plasma osmolality. In addition, an early stimulus must exist, generated by peripheral osmo-or Na + receptor cells, which signals the brain in anticipation of subsequent rehydration. Other osmo-or Na + receptor cells appear to mediate the inhibition of NaCl and food intake, which also contributes to osmoregulation during dehydration. Conversely, diuresis and inhibition of water intake promote osmoregulation during overhydration, whereas excitation of NaCl or food intake does not.Like osmotic dehydration, loss of blood volume (hypovolemia) stimulates several adaptive compensatory responses appropriate for restoring circulatory volume. The physiological contributions to volume regulation have been studied extensively in laboratory animals subjected to a controlled loss of blood. Because behavior is compromised by the anemia and hypotension that result from extensive hemorrhage, researchers studying thirst in rats may instead produce hypovolemia by subcutaneous injection of a colloidal solution. Such treatment disrupts the Starling equilibrium in capillaries near the injection site because the extravascular colloid opposes the oncotic effect of plasma proteins. Consequently, fl uid leaches out of capillaries and remains in the interstitial space. Ingested fl uid is also drawn into the interstitial space by the colloid so the total fl uid volume required to correct the plasma volume defi cit may be substantial. Water does not move from the cells by osmosis, however, because the osmolality of the injected colloidal solutions actually is similar to that of cells.After colloid injections, rats conserve water and Na + in urine and increase their consumption of water and saline solution An appropriate physiological response to volume depletion should include water conservation and urine concentration. In fact, like plasma hyperosmolality, hypovolemia is an effective stimulus for AVP secretion Loss of blood volume is fi rst detected by stretch receptors in the great veins entering the right atrium of the heart. These stretch receptors provide an afferent vagal signal to the nucleus of the solitary tract (NST) in the brain stem (Chapter 36). Still larger decreases in blood volume may also lower arterial blood pressure and reduce the stretch of receptors in the walls of the carotid sinus and aortic arch. That information is integrated in the NST with neural messages from the lowpressure, venous side of the circulation. Note that these sensory neurons are not actually baroreceptors (literally, pressure receptors), although commonly they are referred to as such.The ascending pathway between the NST in the brain stem and the SON and PVN in the hypothalamus includes noradrenergic fi bers arising from A1 cells in the ventrolateral medulla. Volume depletion stimulates AVP secretion via other pathways as well. In addition, the kidneys secrete renin during hypovolemia, a response mediated in part by sympathetic neural input to b-adrenergic receptors on cells that secrete renin. Renin is an enzyme that initiates a cascade of biochemical steps that result in the formation of angiotensin II (AII) In addition to the antidiuresis and vasoconstriction produced by the secretion of AVP and activation of the renin-angiotensin system, colloid treatment increases water intake in rats Intravenous infusion of AII strongly stimulates thirst in rats and most other animals studied in the laboratory (including humans). AII adds to the thirst stimulated by an osmotic load when the two treatments are combined. There had been considerable controversy about whether AII functions as a normal physiological stimulus of thirst because the doses of AII required to stimulate signifi cant water intake produce blood levels of AII well above the physiological range. However, such doses also increase arterial blood pressure, and it has been shown that this acute hypertension inhibits thirst and limits the induced water intake. For example, drinking was enhanced considerably when the hypertensive effects of AII were blunted by a simultaneous administration of vasodilating agents Hypovolemic rats need isotonic saline, not water alone, to repair their plasma volume defi cits. When the rats drink only water, about two-thirds of the ingested volume moves into cells by osmosis, and much of what remains extracellular is captured by the colloid. Thus, most of the water that is consumed does not remain in the vascular compartment, and the volume defi cit within the vascular compartment persists. This situation may be contrasted with the negative feedback control of osmoregulatory thirst in which the dehydration of osmoreceptor cells causes thirst and ingested water repairs dehydration, eliminating the stimulus for thirst.Rather than repairing the volume defi cit, the water consumed by hypovolemic rats causes a second serious VOLUME HOMEOSTASIS challenge to body fl uid homeostasis: osmotic dilution. The animals cannot readily eliminate this self-administered water load because hypovolemia reduces GFR and thereby diminishes urinary excretion independent of AVP. Therefore, when water is the only drinking fl uid available, an appropriate response of colloidtreated rats would be to stop drinking and thereby limit the secondary problem of osmotic dilution. In experiments, colloid-treated rats actually do stop drinking water despite persistent hypovolemia, and the stimulus for the inhibition of thirst has been found to be osmotic dilution of body fl uids As mentioned earlier, hypovolemic animals need to consume and retain water and NaCl, not just water. Appropriately, colloid-treated rats drink NaCl solution and conserve Na + in urine. Renal Na + retention is mediated largely by aldosterone secreted from the adrenal cortex, although Na + conservation also occurs in association with the decrease in GFR. The central nervous system does not innervate the adrenal cortex, as it does the adrenal medulla. However, a neural infl uence on aldosterone secretion is provided indirectly because AII is a very potent stimulus of aldosterone secretion, and renin secretion from the kidneys during hypovolemia is stimulated in part by the sympathetic nervous system ( The onset of salt appetite induced in rats by colloid treatment is curiously delayed relative to the appearance of thirst. That is, water intake increases within 1 to 2 h after colloid treatment, whereas the intake of NaCl solution does not increase until at least 5 h later After surgical removal of their adrenal glands, rats increase their consumption of NaCl by amounts proportional to the sodium loss in urine disappeared as the animals drank water. In other studies, however, rats showed a strong inverse relationship between intake of NaCl and plasma levels of oxytocin (but not AVP), suggesting that circulating oxytocin was an inhibitory stimulus of salt appetite.However, in tests of the hypothesis that circulating oxytocin inhibits salt appetite, an intravenous infusion of physiological doses of oxytocin did not decrease NaCl intake in hypovolemic rats, nor did infusion of an oxytocin receptor blocker increase NaCl intake. These unexpected fi ndings were clarifi ed by the observation that, coincident with the secretion of oxytocin from magnocellular neurons, oxytocin was released from parvicellular neurons projecting centrally from the PVN. Thus, plasma oxytocin may have been a peripheral marker of the centrally acting oxytocin that mediated the inhibition of salt appetite in rats Central oxytocinergic neurons can inhibit salt intake and food intake (Chapter 38). Thus, when osmotic dehydration activates oxytocinergic neurons, the intake of food and salt is inhibited and hyperosmolality is thereby prevented. From this perspective, food is a source of osmolytes (not just of calories) and NaCl solution provides osmolytes without calories. Inhibition of intake of osmolytes complements the natriuretic effect of pituitary oxytocin in supporting osmoregulation.The role of oxytocin in osmoregulation has become apparent only during the last decade, and the identification of other peptide hormones as important factors in the homeostasis of body fl uids may be anticipated. One likely candidate is atrial natriuretic peptide. Like oxytocin, ANP promotes Na + loss in urine; in fact, ANP may mediate the natriuretric effects of OT. Also, like oxytocin, ANP is secreted by neurons within the brain, and when administered directly into the cerebrospinal fl uid, it inhibits an experimentally induced salt appetite in rats. Moreover, destruction of ANP receptors in the brain eliminates the inhibition of salt appetite caused by a NaCl load Regulation of blood volume, like osmoregulation, is accomplished by a combination of physiological responses to hypovolemia, resulting in antidiuresis and antinatriuresis, and the complementary behavioral responses of increased water and NaCl intake. Cardiovascular baroreceptor cells detect hypovolemia and send neural signals to the brain stem, which communicates to the hypothalamus and forebrain structures mediating neurohypophyseal AVP and oxytocin secretion, as well as thirst and salt appetite. AII also appears to stimulate these responses while additionally supporting blood pressure as a potent vasoconstrictor. However, AII and hypovolemia both increase central oxytocin secretion, which mediates inhibition of NaCl intake, so for salt appetite to emerge this effect must be inhibited (as by osmotic dilution of body fl uids, resulting from the renal retention of ingested water). The integration of these stimuli ensures that behavioral and physiological responses occur simultaneously, and their redundancy allows these vital regulatory processes to occur even when one stimulus is lost due to injury or disease. More generally, studies of water and NaCl ingestion provide insights into how the brain controls motivation, and how peptide and steroid hormones interact with neural signals in the control of behavior.The hypothalamus, located at the most rostral region of the brain stem in the diencephalon, is a key center regulating numerous and diverse physiological functions, including growth, metabolism, stress responses, reproduction, osmoregulation, and circadian rhythms. All these functions are critically involved in maintaining the homeostasis of the organism and in coordinating the occurrence and timing of physiological functions with the appropriate environmental conditions. In order to accomplish this, the hypothalamus acts as an integrator, receiving converging inputs from virtually every sensory and autonomic system related to the internal and external environment of the organism. The hypothalamus responds rapidly to this convergent information by changing its output of neurotransmitters and neuropeptides, thereby affecting change at its targets within the central ner vous system (CNS), the pituitary gland, and the bloodstream.The hypothalamus contains several groups of cells that are defi ned as neuroendocrine, meaning that they have both neuronal and endocrine features. Neuroendocrine cells in the central nervous system have a neuronal phenotype, and release a peptide or neurotransmitter in response to a depolarizing stimulus. In this way, they are similar to other nonneuroendocrine neurons in the brain. However, neuroendocrine cells differ from other "traditional" neurons in their targets and modes of release. Instead of releasing their neuropeptide or neurotransmitter at another neuron, for example, via synaptic connections, these hypothalamic neuroendocrine cells release their neurotransmitter into a blood system. An endocrine gland is characterized by its direct release of a substance into a blood system. Thus, these neuroendocrine cells in the brain are true endocrine organs in the sense that their targets are a vascular system. Although the substances released by most neuroendocrine cells are peptides and neurotransmitters, they are also appropriately referred to as hormones because they are released into blood vessels to act remotely at a target organ. Thus, the molecules released by these hypothalamic neuroendocrine cells, to be discussed later in this chapter, often are referred to as neurohormones.The primary target of hypothalamic neuroendocrine cells is the pituitary gland ( The posterior pituitary gland also is regulated by hypothalamic cells, but the anatomical connectivity between the hypothalamus and the neurohypo physis differs from the hypothalamic-adenohypophysial system. Hypothalamic cells that regulate the neurohypophysis have their cell bodies in the hypothalamus, but their nerve terminals project directly into the posterior pituitary gland ( The concept of a link between the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland was suggested and later demonstrated by Geoffrey Harris, who proved the existence of a tiny series of blood vessels leading from the median eminence at the base of the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary gland To date, fi ve neuroendocrine systems have been identifi ed involving hypothalamic-adenohypophysial-target organ regulation. These systems each are characterized by a primary hypothalamic hormone that either stimulates ("releasing" hormone) or inhibits ("inhibiting" hormone) and its corresponding FIGURE 40.1 General features of brain-pituitary-target organ systems. For the fi ve hypothalamic releasing/inhibiting hormonal systems that control reproduction, stress, metabolism, growth, and lactation, each system has a hypothalamic neurosecretory cell, a corresponding pituitary hormone, and a target organ and/or hormone. The hypothalamic-neurohypophysial hormones, AVP and OT, are shown at the right. Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotrophic hormone; AVP, arginine vasopressin; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; DA, dopamine; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; GHRH, growth hormone-releasing hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; IGF-I, insulin-like growth factor I; LH, luteinizing hormone; OT, oxytocin; PRL, prolactin; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; T 3 , triiodothyronine; T 4 , thyroxine.anterior pituitary hormone(s) At the hypothalamic level, neuronal perikarya are localized in hypothalamic or preoptic nuclei that vary depending upon the system. The preoptic areas of the brain, just rostral to the hypothalamus, are functionally and neurochemically related to the hypothalamus. Although the precise anatomical localization of the somata of neuroendocrine cells within the hypothalamus and preoptic area may differ, each system projects neuroterminals to a common target, the median eminence, located at the fl oor of the hypothalamus just above the anterior pituitary gland ( The anterior pituitary contains a heterogeneous group of cells that respond to a specifi c releasing or inhibiting hormone. The anterior pituitary cells are specialized, and each has specifi c receptors that bind a specifi c hypothalamic hormone. Thus, although all anterior pituitary cells are exposed to the same "cocktail" of hypothalamic releasing hormones via the portal capillary vasculature, the only cells that will respond to a hypothalamic hormone are those that express the appropriate receptors. The binding of the hypothalamic hormone to its receptor triggers a cascade of biosynthetic and secretory events, stimulating (or inhibiting) the synthesis and release of the pituitary hormone into the general circulatory system. The anterior pituitary gland, like the hypothalamus, is an endocrine gland, in that it releases its hormones into the circulatory system. Anterior pituitary hormones are transported throughout the general circulation to act remotely at organs in the body that are specifi c to each neuroendocrine axis.The target organs of the neuroendocrine axes have specifi c receptors that bind the corresponding pituitary hormone. These target organs respond to the binding of these pituitary hormones to their receptors by increasing (or decreasing) synthesis and secretion of tertiary hormone, such as sex steroid hormones  (from the gonads), thyroxine and triiodothyronine (from the thyroid), insulin-like growth factor-I (from the liver), and glucorticoids (from the adrenal cortex). It is the actions of these hormones at somatic targets that cause the ultimate physiological effect on the body such as growth, metabolism, mediation of stress, and reproductive function. In addition, each of these tertiary hormones feeds back at the level of the brain, hypothalamus, and/or pituitary gland to regulate its neuroendocrine axis. In this way, the delicate hormonal balance is maintained for each system.The hypothalamic-pituitary target organ axes are not an independent series of parallel regulatory systems. These axes have considerable crosstalk with one another and can interact at multiple levels. For example, reproductive and stress axes regulate each other at specifi c hypothalamic neurons, both through direct actions at the CNS, as well as through feedback from the target steroid hormones. During stressful situations, elevated adrenal glucocorticoids will feedback to the brain and have actions not only at the CRH neurons, but at the GnRH neurons as well, thereby suppressing reproduction at a time when it is not optimal. Therefore these hypothalamic neurons serve as integrators of multiple, complex pieces of information about the homeostasis and environment of the organism.Hypothalamic-adenohypophysial axes often are referred to as hypothalamic-pituitary-target axes (the targets being the gonad, adrenal gland, thyroid gland, liver, mammary gland, and other somatic organs). However, although this description is accurate in that hypothalamic hormones are the primary regulators of each of these axes, the central nervous system plays a more complex role in the regulation of neuroendocrine function than simply the release of a hypothalamic hormone. For example, each hypothalamic releasing or inhibiting hormone neuron receives afferent inputs from other elements of the brain, such as neurons or glia, which regulate their functions. Additionally, feedback of hormones released by target organs may not occur directly or exclusively at the respective hypothalamic cells, and therefore feedback regulation of hypothalamic hormones may be mediated by other cells in the brain.A good example is provided by the hypothalamicpituitary-gonadal system that controls reproduction. Hypothalamic GnRH neurons are the primary activators of this axis. These cells stimulate the release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH, from the anterior pituitary, and these molecules in turn target the gonads to stimulate the synthesis and release of sex steroid hormones, particularly estrogens, progestins, and androgens. GnRH neurons express one type of sex steroid hormone receptor, the estrogen receptor b (ERb), but they are not believed to possess other types of sex steroid hormone receptors In considering the release of a hypothalamic hormone and its resulting effect on downstream targets, it is important to note the rhythmicity of this release. Hypothalamic hormones are released in a pulsatile manner, characterized by brief bursts of release, usually at intervals of 1-2 h. This rhythmic pattern also is referred to as ultradian (i.e., shorter than daily rhythms) or circhoral (approximately hourly intervals of release). The corresponding anterior pituitary cells respond to each pulse of a hypothalamic hormone with a corresponding pulse of its pituitary hormone shortly thereafter ( Along with these ultradian pulses of hypothalamic pulses are the circadian or diurnal rhythms of hormonal release that are characteristic of the neuroendocrine system. These 24-h rhythms of hormone release, which can occur independently of the light/dark cycle (circadian) or are entrained to the light/dark cycle (diurnal), are characteristic of neuro endocrine systems Cycles of hormonal release longer than 24 h can be observed for the reproductive axis. This is discussed in more detail later, but in brief, female vertebrates often exhibit reproductive cycles, such as the four-day estrous cycles of rats or the 28-day menstrual cycles of many primates, including humans. Reproductive hormones undergo substantial fl uctuations across these cycles. Even longer cycles are observed in the cases of seasonal breeders that may be sexually active during certain periods of the year, and as infrequently as once per year or even less. This seasonality enables the females of the species to coordinate the energetically demanding process of pregnancy, lactation, and rearing of the offspring with the appropriate environmental conditions.Five neuroendocrine axes are involved in the control of metabolism, growth, reproduction, lactation, and stress. These systems are summarized in The proper regulation of metabolism is critical for the development and survival of the organism. The brain-pituitary-thyroid axis plays a critical role in the control of metabolic activity, stimulating an increase in metabolic processes in target cells. The hypothalamic hormone involved in this function is thyro tropinreleasing hormone (TRH), produced by a group of cells in a specifi c nucleus in the hypothalamus, the paraventricular nucleus Thyroid hormones act at target organs throughout the body to regulate cellular metabolism. T 3 and T 4 also feed back at the brain and anterior pituitary gland to regulate levels of TRH and TSH, respectively. The thyroid hormone axis is a classical negative feedback loop, as thyroid hormone feedback inhibits the secretion of these hypothalamic and pituitary hormones, thereby maintaining appropriate levels of free thyroid hormone in the bloodstream. Such precise regulation of thyroid hormone levels is critically important because elevated or depressed levels of this hormone can have substantial adverse consequences on the body, particularly during sensitive periods of development.It is important to note the terminology of free versus bound hormone. When the thyroid hormones are  released into the circulation from the thyroid gland, a large portion bind to binding globulins. The free (or not protein-bound) thyroid hormone constitutes only <1% of all thyroid hormone circulating in the bloodstream. It is the free thyroid hormone that is responsible for the negative feedback regulation of TRH neurons and thyrotropes, as well as for actions at target tissues. Bound hormone is not immediately bioavailable but may provide a reservoir for thyroid hormones when they are needed.Thyroid Hormone Is Critical for Cellular Metabolism. The brain-pituitary-thyroid axis is involved in metabolism, protein synthesis, and development of the brain. Thyroid hormone receptors are located throughout the brain, highlighting their importance in central nervous system development and function. They are also found in peripheral and autonomic nervous systems, pituitary gland, bone, muscle, liver, heart, testis, lung, placenta, and other tissues. The major function of the thyroid hormone is the regulation of basal metabolic rate and calorigenic responses. In the target cells, thyroid hormones regulate ATP levels produced by mitochondria and alter protein synthesis. The maintenance of thyroid hormone levels is extremely important for adult metabolic activity, and thyroid hormone abnormalities in the developing organism can have catastrophic consequences. Thyroid hormone deprivation in the fetus causes permanent nervous system abnormalities and substantial effects on growth and bone development that may be reversed or mitigated only if the thyroid hormone is replaced.The pituitary hormone TSH, and presumably the hypothalamic hormone TRH (which is much more diffi cult to measure due to the inaccessibility of the portal capillary system), is released in a pulsatile manner, with pulses occurring at approximately 90-to 180-min intervals in humans TRH and the TRH Receptor. TRH is a tripeptide with the sequence pGlu-His-Pro-NH 2 ( The TRH receptor, localized in the anterior pituitary on thyrotropes, is a G-protein-coupled membrane receptor TSH is an ∼30-kDa glycoprotein hormone, comprising an a and b subunit, that are synthesized from two different genes The TSH receptor is a seven-transmembrane domain G-protein coupled receptor located predominately in the thyroid gland Thyroid Hormones. The two major thyroid hormones are T 4 and T 3 , of which T 3 has greater biological activity With respect to the negative feedback regulation by thyroid hormone Along with its regulation by TSH, the thyroid gland also receives direct neuronal inputs from the autonomic nervous system. Fibers from the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems penetrate the thyroid gland and terminate around arterioles, capillaries, and, less frequently, venules and near follicular cells, providing additional mechanisms for regulation of thyroid hormone output.The Thyroid Hormone Receptor Family. The thyroid hormone receptor is a member of the nuclear hormone superfamily. These are nuclear transcription factors that bind to a regulatory element on the DNA to activate or inhibit gene transcription. Several thyroid hormone receptor isoforms have been identifi ed. These are termed thyroid hormone receptors (TR) a and b, which are derived from different genes and can be alternatively spliced. Thus, each TR subtype has a splice variant, termed a1, a2, b1, and b2. a1 and b2 are most abundant in the hypothalamus and are found in more than 80% of TRH neurons in the PVN TRH neurons are concentrated in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus Thyroid hormone excess or insuffi ciency can have profound effects on the central nervous system, particularly during development. Thus, a normal or euthyroid tone is necessary for the health and survival of the organism. Excessive thyroid hormone, or hyperthyroidism, can result in symptoms such as tremor, nervousness, tremulousness, insomnia and sleep disorders, and impairments in memory and concentration. More profound effects include neuropsychiatric syndromes, seizure, chorea, and even coma. Defi ciencies of the thyroid hormone, called hypothyroidism, can cause problems such as sleep apnea, hypothermia, hypoventilation, neuropsychiatric syndromes, peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar ataxia, and coma. During chronic thyroid hormone defi ciency, fl uids can accumulate and result in puffi ness of the hands, feet, face, and tongue and cause speech impairment. This is called myxedema. Hypothyroidism generally is treated by thyroid hormone replacement.When an organism is exposed to insuffi cient thyroid hormone during fetal or early neonatal development, it can develop cretinism, characterized by severe deficits in mental, neurological, and physical development. Most of these defi ciencies can be mitigated or even reversed by newborn infant screening and thyroid hormone replacement.Somatic growth is an obvious characteristic of the development of vertebrate organisms. The somatotropic axis has three levels: the primary hypothalamic hormones, of which there are two, growth hormonereleasing hormone (GHRH) and a growth hormoneinhibiting hormone, called somatostatin; the secondary pituitary hormone, called growth hormone (GH) or somatotropin; and the tertiary target organ, in this case the liver, which produces insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) in response to the GH stimulus. A special characteristic of the somatotropic axis is that its pituitary hormone, GH, as well as its tertiary hormone, IGF-I, can exert growth-promoting effects alone or in combination. In fact, GH and IGF-I act synergistically with each other to affect somatic growth. However, both of these hormones play important roles, as mutations resulting in the absence of either GH or IGF-I result in dwarfi sm.Unlike most other neuroendocrine systems, the somatotropic axis has two known hypothalamic hormones that play important but opposing roles Growth hormone and IGF-I both appear to be involved in the feedback regulation of the somatotropic axis The Somatotropic Axis Controls Somatic Growth and Development. GH plays its major role in neonatal and postnatal growth and is particularly important in the pubertal growth spurt. Its anabolic activities are critical for metabolic homeostasis. The growth hormone stimulates protein synthesis, increases lipolysis, infl uences carbohydrate metabolism, enhances glucose uptake and utilization, and has lipolytic effects. At the systems level, it stimulates the growth of organs, such as the heart and kidney, and plays a role in hormone production, skeletal growth and maturation, and immune function. Many of its effects are sexually dimorphic, as are the distribution of its receptors and other proteins involved in this axis.Pulsatile and Diurnal Release of GHRH and Somatostatin. Both GHRH and somatostatin are released from hypothalamic nerve terminals into the portal circulation in a pulsatile manner, similar to other neurohormones. It might be predicted that these neurohormones might be released out of phase, but in fact, their release often is coordinated. Pulses of GHRH appear to drive pulses of growth hormone, which occur at intervals of about l-3 h.The growth hormone is released in a diurnal pattern. The 24-h cycle of GH release is strongly associated with sleep, with highest levels occurring shortly after the onset of slow-wave sleep, and most GH secretion occurring at night in humans. Thus, this is not a true circadian rhythm but rather a diurnal pattern of release Growth Hormone-Releasing Hormone and Somatostatin. GHRH is derived from a 108 amino acid precursor protein, called preproGHRH. Following a multistep processing procedure involving cleavage by endopeptidases, mature GHRH molecules are produced ( GHRH binds to its receptor on somatotropes in the anterior pituitary gland to affect the release of growth hormone. The GHRH receptor is a member of the G-protein-coupled receptor family synthesis of the growth hormone that is triggered by GHRH probably involves the cAMP-induced phosphorylation of the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), which binds to an enhancer element in the promoter of the somatotropin gene to stimulate its transcription.The somatostatin gene contains two exons that are transcribed into a 0.85-kb mRNA. This mRNA is translated into a 116 amino acid precursor protein, preprosomatostatin. This precursor is cleaved by endopeptidases and is a tissue-specifi c process. In the hypothalamus, somatostatin is cleaved into two biologically active forms, somatostatin-14 and somatostatin-28, the latter having an N-terminal extension of the somatostatin-14 molecule The binding of somatostatin to its receptor causes a cascade of events involved in the inhibition of growth hormone release. To date, there are fi ve known somatostatin receptors (SS-Rs), with different properties and affi nities. All these receptors involve an inhibitory G protein (G i ), which reduces cAMP and causes cell hyperpolarization and a diminution of Ca 2+ infl ux into cells.Growth Hormone. Growth hormone, or somatotropin, is a 191 amino acid protein that contains two disulfi de bonds that give it a three-dimensional conformation that is necessary for its biological activity. Release of the growth hormone is triggered by GHRH and is inhibited by somatostatin. The growth hormone plays a negative feedback role in the somatotropic axis, feeding back at the level of the GHRH neuron in the hypothalamus to inhibit GHRH mRNA levels and synthesis and stimulating somatostatin gene expression and release. Not only does the regulation of growth hormone involve the balance between GHRH and somatostatin, but it also involves other neurotransmitters and neuroactive substances, such as dopamine, vasoactive intestinal peptide, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide, TRH, galanin, neuropeptide Y, motilin, and interleukins. In addition, other hormones, such as the thyroid hormone, glucocorticoids, sex steroid hormones, and metabolic fuels, can infl uence the release of growth hormone, highlighting the interwoven nature of the different neuroendocrine systems.The growth hormone is released into the general circulation, where approximately 50% of this molecule is transported in association with a growth hormonebinding protein that is the same as the extracellular domain of the growth hormone receptor. This molecule and the growth hormone receptor (GH-R) are alternative splice products of the same precursor RNA into two distinct mRNAs: one for the growth hormonebinding protein and one for the GH-R.The GH-R is a member of the cytokine receptor family A major target for the growth hormone is the IGF-I system. IGF-I is a growth factor that exerts effects on neurite outgrowth and nervous system development. In addition, it is an important mediator of the somatotropic axis and, in fact, was originally referred to as somatomedin. Both GH and IGF-I individually have similar effects on somatic growth and development; however, the two hormones act much more effi ciently in combination. In addition, it appears that the growth-promoting effects of IGF-I are particularly important in the central nervous system. This is consistent with the observation that along with its production by the liver, IGF-I is also produced in the brain, and it is probably this central IGF-I that is responsible for many of its neurotrophic effects.Like the growth hormone, IGF-I plays a feedback role in the inhibition of GHRH biosynthesis The IGF-I gene has been cloned in a number of species and encodes a precursor molecule of 105 amino acids that is cleaved into the mature IGF-I of 70 amino acids. IGF-I in the circulation binds to several binding proteins, the major one being IGF-I binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3). Free IGF-I is more biologically active than bound IGF-I, and therefore IGFBP-3 levels are an important regulator of the actions of IGF-I. At its target tissues, IGF-I binds to its receptor, a member of the receptor tyrosine kinase family, which utilizes the MAP kinase system as its second messenger system.Most GHRH-containing neurons are located in the basomedial hypothalamus in the arcuate nucleus, lateral to the fl oor of the third ventricle Somatostatin cell bodies have a very different localization from the GHRH system. Unlike GHRH neurons, whose perikarya are concentrated in a discrete nucleus, somatostatin somata are more dispersed throughout the central nervous system. Perikarya of the somatostatin neurons involved in the regulation of growth hormone release are found primarily in the periventricular region of the anterior hypothalamus ( Inputs from metabolically active substances affect the somatostatin system. Amino acids are thought to stimulate, and fatty acids and glucose to inhibit, somatostatin secretion. There are also a number of neurotransmitters involved in the regulation of somatostatin levels. Catecholamines such as dopamine and norepinephrine are implicated in this process, as are acetylcholine and GABA. Neuropeptides, including substance P, neurotensin, and bombesin, can alter somatostatin levels, and factors involved in glucoregulation, such as glucose and glucoregulatory enzymes and hormones, modify activity of the somatostatin system.Somatic growth and development are affected by disruptions of the somatotropic axis, and the consequences are dependent on when during development the system is affected. In early development, growth hormone defi ciency can result in an extremely short stature, with adults sometimes reaching a maximal height of less than 1 m. Growth hormone defi ciency is generally treated with growth hormone replacement using recombinant growth hormone. In some cases, GHRH, rather than growth hormone, is replaced in a pulsatile manner. Dwarfi sm is sometimes caused by mutations in the IGF-I system, or in the GH receptor. Laron dwarfi sm, characterized by mutations in the GH receptor gene, results in very low IGF-I levels, but GH levels are high, probably due to reduced negative feedback from the low IGF-I concentrations.If GH is oversecreted or dysregulated during development, the consequence can be gigantism, resulting in an extremely large stature. When abnormal GH stimulation occurs after adulthood, this results in acromegaly. In adulthood, only certain tissues remain responsive to growth hormone stimulation, including the jaws, nose, orbital ridges, fi ngers, elbows, and knees, and these tissues are stimulated to grow while other tissues are not, causing deformations in proportions and appearance.In order to survive, an animal must be able to adapt to stress, which can be manifested in a variety of forms. These stressors can include the acute stress of escaping predation or the chronic stress of a disease, the social situation, or social status. Thus, a stress is an internal or external cue that disrupts the homeostatic status of the animal.The neuroendocrine system involved in mediating the stress response is the brain-pituitary-adrenal axis. The hypothalamic releasing hormone controlling this axis is corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), produced in highest levels in the medial parvocellular part of the paraventricular nucleus (mpPVN; Glucocorticoids Mediate Stress Responses and Affect Cellular Metabolism. Corticosteroids are necessary for normal fetal development. Enzymes in the liver, gastrointestinal system, lungs, and adrenal medulla are stimulated by glucocorticoids. There, glucocorticoids play important roles in the regulation of glycogen utilization and storage, with glucocorticoids promoting the production of glycogen synthase. The stress axis is subject to developmental and age-related regulation due to changes in afferent connections to the hypothalamus, glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptor-binding changes, and alterations in the negative feedback of glucocorticoids on CRH neurons.Glucocorticoids exert effects on the cardiovascular system, causing elevations in heart rate and blood pressure and alterations in blood fl ow. They act in close coordination with the autonomic nervous system to exert their effects. In general, their role is to mobilize energy stores and to improve cardiovascular tone. Glucocorticoids may also modulate immune responses and inhibit cytokine production, thereby playing a role in the inhibition of the infl ammatory response. Glucocorticoids can interact with hormones produced by other neuroendocrine axes, such as those involved in thyroid function, reproductive function, and growth. Chronic stress can suppress the growth axis and reproductive function and cause hyperthyroidism Pulsatile and Circadian Release of Stress Hormones. Stress hormones exhibit both pulsatile and circadian cycles CRH. Corticotropin-releasing hormone is a 41 amino acid peptide expressed in the parvocellular region of the PVN in the hypothalamus ACTH. ACTH derives from the cleavage of a precursor protein, proopiomelanocortin (POMC), in the corticotropes The ACTH receptor is a member of the melanocortin family of receptors Glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids are members of the steroid hormone family. As is the case for sex steroid hormones (discussed later), they derive from a cholesterol precursor. Following a series of enzymatic reactions, the major corticosteroids, such as cortisol (in humans; The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is widely distributed in the central nervous system, including the hypothalamus and, more specifi cally, the CRH cells of the PVN. Thus, glucocorticoid negative feedback can occur directly on the hypothalamic cells driving the stress axis. GRs are also abundant in the hippocampus, in pyramidal cells, and in dentate granule cells. The hippocampus appears to play a role in mediating the stress response, and there are multiple redundant pathways between the hippocampus and the PVN.GRs are found in many other brain regions such as the olfactory cortex, cerebral cortex, amygdala, septum, thalamus, midbrain raphe nuclei, cerebellum, and brain stem Glucocorticoids can also bind to the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), the primary ligand of which is aldosterone. Moreover, the brain MR has a higher (∼10-fold higher) affi nity for glucocorticoids than the GR. Both of these receptors are members of the steroid hormone superfamily. They are thought to reside in the cytoplasm of target cells in the unliganded state. When bound to their ligands, GRs or MRs translocate into the nucleus, where they bind to specifi c sites on the promoter of the responsive gene. Thus, GR and MR are transcription factors. Their effi cacy in stimulating or inhibiting gene transcription is modulated by their binding to other molecules, such as heat shock proteins, which can alter the translocation of the receptor-ligand complex to the nucleus, or transcriptional coactivators, which modulate the complexes associated with the gene (Chapters 3 and 4).Chronic exposure to glucocorticoids can cause damage to the brain, which is particularly apparent in the hippocampus, a brain region abundant in GRs. It has been observed that chronic corticosteroids changes the morphology of CA3 dendritic fi elds and may lead to neurodegeneration and eventually cell death. Nevertheless, whereas chronic high levels of glucocorticoids may be toxic, a lack of glucocorticoids can also be detrimental. In the dentate gyrus, maintenance of the dentate granule cell number appears to require glucocorticoids, and adrenalectomy results in the loss of granule cells. Moreover, neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus also appears to be glucocorticoid dependent. There are functional correlates to the effects of glucocorticoids on the hippocampus, with these hormones playing roles in learning and memory. Acute stress can interfere with the ability of an organism to learn, and chronic stress is correlated with deficits in spatial learning.CRH neuronal perikarya are localized primarily in the medial parvocellular part of the paraventricular nucleus (mpPVN; Inputs from the brain stem are catecholaminergic pathways involved in the transmission of visceral information. The catecholamine system plays an important role as a stress mediator, possibly as an autonomic nervous system neurotransmitter. Noradrenergic projections to the PVN arise from the nucleus of the solitary tract (A2 cell group), the A1 cell group of the ventrolateral medulla, and the locus coeruleus. Inputs from the midbrain may involve the midbrain raphe cell groups, which are serotonergic in nature. The midbrain periaqueductal gray and pontine central gray regions relay sensory information to the PVN, as do caudal thalamus and cholinergic brain stem regions (laterodorsal tegmental nucleus and the pedunculopontine nucleus). These inputs appear to play a role in relaying somatic and special sensory information. Inputs to the PVN from the limbic system arise from the prefrontal cortex, septum, amygdala, and hippocampus, and a notable projection to the PVN is from the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis to the PVN. These inputs relay information on cognition and emotion. The circumventricular organs (subfornical organ, OVLT) convey information to the PVN from blood-borne chemosensory signals. The major neurotransmitters involved in this function are GABA and angiotensin II. Finally, the hypothalamus itself signals to the PVN, and these connections may provide signals about the motivational state of the animal or relay other stress-specifi c signals. However, the functions of these interhypothalamic projections are not well understood.The negative feedback loop of CRH-ACTH-glucocorticoids is kept in a delicate balance. In response to stress, there is a large increase in the activity of the stress axis, but the system is downregulated rapidly by negative feedback from the glucocorticoids to the brain and pituitary gland, causing it to return the output of the stress axis to basal low levels.Overactivity of the stress axis can increase susceptibility to infection and tumors and reduce infl ammatory and autoimmune disease Underactivity of the stress axis can cause the opposite effects of hyperactivity, namely resistance to infection and tumors but increased susceptibility to infl ammatory and autoimmune disease. In the case of adrenocortical insuffi ciency, there is generally a failure of the adrenal cortex to respond to ACTH. Addison's disease is characterized by an insuffi cient release of glucocorticoid secretion, and its symptoms include muscle weakness and fatigue, psychological symptoms, gastrointestinal symptoms, and changes in skin pigmentation. Fortunately, glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement can help mitigate these symptoms.Reproduction is critical to the survival of the species. In vertebrate organisms, the reproductive axis comprises (1) the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons, also called luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) neurons, of the hypothalamus and preoptic area; (2) the gonadotropes of the anterior pituitary gland; and (3) the gonads (ovary in females and testis in males) The sex steroid hormones, once released into the circulatory system, act at receptors that are located throughout the body to exert their classical effects on secondary sex characteristic development and on adult reproductive function. In addition, sex steroid hormones act on receptors in the brain, including the hypothalamus, to exert diverse effects on the CNS. One of the major effects of sex steroid hormones is as a feedback modulator of the hypothalamic GnRH neurons. However, along with the traditional negative feedback exerted in neuroendocrine systems, in females, ovulation is controlled by positive feedback from sex steroid hormones. This concept of negative/ positive feedback regulation is discussed later, and is unique to the reproductive neuroendocrine system of females.Activity of the Reproductive Axis Varies during the Life Cycle. Not surprisingly, functions of the reproductive axis change during the life cycle of the organism, as reproductive function varies with developmental stage At the onset of puberty, the GnRH system becomes activated, probably due to the removal of inhibitory afferents to GnRH neurons, dominated by GABAergic neurons, and the ability of stimulatory afferents to GnRH neurons to exert a stimulatory tone on GnRH regulation. To date, numerous substances have been implicated in the activation of GnRH neurons at the onset of puberty, including glutamate (through the NMDA receptor), kisspeptin, norepinephrine, neuropeptide Y, and growth factors such as transforming growth factor-a and IGF-I. Once mature reproductive function has been attained (ovulation in females, viable sperm in ejaculates of males), the pulsatile release of GnRH and its regulation of the reproductive axis continues for much of the life cycle. In many species, females exhibit reproductive cycles (estrous cycles, menstrual cycles) of varying lengths, such as the four-  hypothalamus projecting their neuroterminals to the external zone of the median eminence. This occurs bilaterally, although only a unilateral projection is shown. GnRH travels through the portal vasculature to cause the synthesis and release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH, from gonadotropes. These molecules act at the gonads (ovary and testis) to cause the biosynthesis and release of sex steroid hormones. These are released into general circulation to affect secondary sex characteristics and act at other somatic tissues. Sex steroid hormones feed back negatively at the brain and pituitary to regulate biosynthesis of GnRH and the gonadotropins in males and females. In addition, prior to ovulation, these steroids exert positive feedback in females. Right: The decapeptide structure of GnRH, general structural features of the gonadotropins, and the structures of progesterone, 17b-estradiol, and testosterone are shown. Abbreviations: AH, anterior hypothalamus; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; iii, third ventricle. day estrous cycles of small rodents and the 28-day menstrual cycles of humans and many nonhuman primates.In human females but not most other species, menopause, the cessation of menstrual cycles and lack of ovulation, signals the end of the reproductive life cycle. The most obvious characteristic of menopause is a loss of ovarian follicles, called follicular atresia. Although many other mammals undergo reproductive senescence, characterized by a lack of spontaneous reproductive cycles, this is not always due to follicular atresia. Instead, in these species, such as rodents, reproductive senescence is probably due to the loss of drive from hypothalamic GnRH neurons and/or changes in pituitary gonadotropin responses to GnRH rather than overt ovarian changes. In humans, it is quite possible that there are also hypothalamic and pituitary changes that may play a role in the menopausal process that are only just beginning to be understood.Pulsatile, Diurnal, and Seasonal Release of GnRH and LH/FSH. GnRH is released in a pulsatile manner from neuroterminals in the external zone of the median eminence ( The mechanisms by which GnRH pulses are generated are not entirely understood, as these neurons are widely dispersed through the hypothalamus and preoptic area; although contacts between GnRH somata have been observed, these are not abundant. Recent evidence suggests that GnRH dendrites may make anatomical contacts. It is also possible that GnRH neurons coordinate their pulses via some signals at the level of the median eminence where the GnRH neuroterminals converge. Finally, other afferent systems contacting and regulating GnRH neurons may release their neurotransmitters in a pulsatile manner, and this may be a way of coordinating the widely scattered GnRH perikarya to release pulses of GnRH in a coordinated manner.A pulsatile manner of GnRH release is necessary for the maintenance of pituitary gonadotropin function. When GnRH is infused continuously, the GnRH receptor in the pituitary is downregulated and gonadotropin secretion is inhibited. If exogenous GnRH is infused in a pulsatile manner, the GnRH receptor is upregulated on the gonadotropes. The pulsatile release of GnRH is more or less constant in males, with pulses occurring approximately every 1-2 h. However, in females, the nature of GnRH pulses varies across the reproductive cycle. In primates that have a 28-day menstrual cycle, LH pulses (measured as proxy for GnRH pulses) occur approximately once per hour during the early follicular phase, but slow to a frequency of once every 90 min later in the follicular phase as estrogen negative feedback increases. Just prior to ovulation, a large increase in GnRH release can be measured, although it is still controversial whether discrete pulses continue to be superimposed on this "GnRH surge." Nevertheless, it is likely that there is a change in the mode of GnRH release during the preovulatory period.The pulsatile release pattern of GnRH, LH, and FSH is superimposed upon a diurnal pattern of the release of these hormones The reproductive axis can exhibit rhythms even longer than those entrained to the 24-h clock. Many species are seasonal breeders, in which reproductive processes are coordinated to a time of the year when the likelihood of the survival of the offspring is highest. Seasonal breeding animals such as sheep have an almost completely inactive reproductive axis during the nonbreeding season, with very low GnRH release, low basal and GnRH-stimulated gonadotropin release, and a lack of ovulation. In many of these species, day length is what drives the seasonal breeding cycles, although this varies among the species. For hamsters, short nights stimulate the reproductive system, whereas short nights inhibit the reproductive axes of sheep.GnRH. GnRH is a 10 amino acid peptide that is synthesized from a 92 amino acid precursor molecule The GnRH peptide is evolutionarily conserved. All mammals studied to date, with the exception of the guinea pig, have an identical GnRH decapeptide in the hypothalamus-preoptic area. Nonmammalian vertebrates have decapeptides similar to the mammalian GnRH molecule, and the conservation is maintained all the way across the evolutionary spectrum to the jawless fi sh, which have a GnRH molecule that is 60 to 70% structurally homologous with the mammalian GnRH decapeptide Unlike other neuroendocrine cells, GnRH neurons of most vertebrates have an unusual embryonic origin, deriving from cells that are fi rst detected in the olfactory placode GnRH binds to its receptor in pituitary gonadotropes to activate the synthesis and release of the gonadotropins. The GnRH receptor is a member of the G-protein coupled receptor family, containing seven transmembrane domains. The G protein involved in this function is probably G q and/or G 11 . The binding of GnRH to its receptor appears to activate several second messenger systems, including the protein kinase A and protein kinase C pathways, as well as the phospholipase C pathway Gonadotropins. The gonadotropins, LH and FSH, originally were named after their functions in the female ovary, namely their ability to cause luteinization of the follicle (hence LH) and to promote follicular development (hence FSH). However, these same gonadotropins are synthesized and released from the anterior pituitary gland of males and play a critical role in the regulation of testicular function. Thus, in the testis, LH is primarily responsible for steroidogenesis, and FSH for spermatogenesis.LH and FSH are glycoprotein hormones Sex Steroid Hormones. Sex steroid hormones are synthesized from the precursor cholesterol in a multistep process. Cholesterol fi rst is converted to pregnenolone, which is converted to progesterone Sex steroid hormones are synthesized and secreted from the ovaries or testes to regulate the expression of secondary sex characteristics and to maintain adult reproductive function. In the Leydig cells of the testis, LH released from the pituitary gland is responsible for testosterone biosynthesis. Together with FSH, testosterone acts to coordinate and stimulate spermatogenesis in testicular seminiferous tubules. The testosterone that is released from the testis acts at secondary sex targets such as the internal and external genitalia (prostate, seminal vesicles, penis) to cause their development and maintain their functions. In addition, testosterone acts at muscle to increase muscle mass, causes the growth of facial and body hair, and enlarges the epiglottis, which is responsible for the deepening of the voice. In the ovary, FSH stimulates follicular development during each ovarian cycle, and LH is the primary stimulator of ovulation. Steroidogenesis in the ovary is also stimulated by FSH and LH. The resulting ovarian hormones, primarily 17b-estradiol and progesterone, are responsible for the development of female secondary sex characteristics such as the genitalia and mammary tissue.Sex steroid hormone feedback in the male is accomplished by the usual neuroendocrine negative feedback mechanism In the female, the ovarian steroid hormones estradiol and progesterone can act at the hypothalamus to provide negative feedback. During most of the reproductive cycle, these hormones feed back at the brain and the pituitary gland to suppress the release of GnRH and the gonadotropins, respectively. However, during the mid-to late follicular stage in primates, or on the day of proestrus in rats with a four-to fi ve-day estrous cycle, feedback effects of estrogens on GnRH release become positive. The stimulatory effects of estradiol on the hypothalamus result in the occurrence of the "preovulatory GnRH surge," which in turn triggers a preovulatory LH surge, that triggers the fi nal maturation of the ovum in the follicle and results in ovulation and the subsequent development of the corpus luteum. After ovulation, feedback of ovarian steroid hormones upon the hypothalamus and pituitary reverts to the negative mode until the next cycle.Unlike the other neuroendocrine systems, the primary feedback site of gonadal steroid hormones does not appear to be the GnRH neurons. Although GnRH neurons express the ERb, they do not express appreciable levels of ERa, androgen receptors (AR), or progesterone receptors (PR). Therefore, it is thought that other neural cells that make afferent inputs to GnRH neurons, and which express nuclear sex steroid receptors, may mediate effects of sex steroid feedback onto GnRH cells. The mediation of gonadal steroid feedback by intermediary cells in the CNS, primarily those expressing the ERa, may also help to explain the "switch" between negative and positive feedback onto the GnRH neurons in females GnRH neurons are not localized in a discrete hypothalamic nucleus, but are relatively widely dispersed across a continuum of the hypothalamus and preoptic area The morphology of the hypophysiotropic GnRH-1 neurons is somewhat different from other neuroendocrine neurons, possibly due to differences in the cells' embryonic origin in the olfactory placode. GnRH neurons are oval or fusiform in shape and extend a single axon to the median eminence. They also receive relatively little synaptic input on their perikarya, although recent evidence suggests they may receive afferent input on their dendrites. Nevertheless, GnRH neurons are functionally regulated by numerous neurotransmitters and neurotrophic factors, and this is probably related to the integrative nature of the GnRH neuron. In order for reproduction to be successful, the organism must be able to assess the conditions of internal and external environment to determine that conditions are optimal. The numerous inputs to GnRH neurons from other sensory and neuroendocrine cells enables these key reproductive neurons to evaluate the organism's health and fi tness and the external conditions (e.g., season, food availability, the presence of predators or a conspecifi c mate) and to coordinate the timing of reproduction, which is quite costly, with the optimal external and internal circumstances. Thus, GnRH cells are regulated by inputs from neurotransmitters such as glutamate, GABA, catecholamines and monoamines, neuropeptides such as kisspeptin, CRH, b-endorphin, vasopressin, neurotensin, neurotrophic factors, and many other substances. In this way, GnRH neurons receive cues regarding nutritional status, thermogenesis and exercise, stress, and social cues and can integrate these inputs to coordinate the timing of reproduction with the appropriate stimuli.There are two natural genetic mutations lacking normal GnRH systems. In humans, Kallmann's syndrome is characterized by the failure of GnRH neurons to migrate properly during embryonic development. Although these patients develop essentially normally in most other ways (except that they are anosmic due to abnormalities of the olfactory placode from which both GnRH neurons and olfactory cells derive), they never enter puberty and are infertile. Replacement of pulsatile GnRH to these individuals can stimulate the onset of puberty and maturation of the secondary sex characteristics and fertility. The hypogonadal (hpg) mouse has a defect in the GnRH gene. Similar to their human Kallmann's syndrome counterparts, these animals never undergo reproductive development and can be "rescued" by GnRH replacement.Other defects of the reproductive system involve the timing of the onset of puberty. In idiopathic central precocious puberty, GnRH is released far earlier than is normal, for example, in patients as young as 1 year of age. Although the mechanism by which the GnRH release is stimulated precocially is unknown, this results in activation of the release of pituitary gonadotropins, stimulation of the gonads, and the early development of secondary sexual characteristics. Treatment with long-lasting GnRH agonists, which initially stimulate but rapidly down-regulate pituitary GnRH receptors, cause a downregulation of the reproductive axis and can halt pubertal development until the normal timing of puberty occurs. In the case of delayed puberty, the normal pubertal release of GnRH does not occur, and exogenous GnRH can be infused in a pulsatile manner to cause the stimulation of puberty in these individuals.The pituitary hormone prolactin is a major regulator of lactation in mammals. However, unlike the other pituitary hormones, a unique releasing neuropeptide hormone for prolactin has not been identifi ed in the hypothalamus, although there is a prolactin-inhibiting factor, dopamine It is generally accepted that hypothalamic dopamine plays a major role in the inhibition of prolactin release, and dopamine is probably the prolactin-inhibiting factor Regarding the stimulation of prolactin release by a hypothalamic factor(s), though many molecules have been proposed, none appears to be a unique prolactinreleasing hormone. TRH, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, and oxytocin can stimulate prolactin release but they do not appear to have the one-to-one relationship between a true hypothalamic releasing factor and its adenohypophysial hormone. Thus, the search for a unique hypothalamic-releasing hormone for prolactin is ongoing.Role of Prolactin in Reproductive Physiology and Lactation. The release of prolactin varies by age, sex, and reproductive status. Levels of prolactin are higher in females than males, probably due to the higher estrogen levels in females, which stimulate prolactin release. During reproductive cycles in females, prolactin levels vary, with levels being higher during the luteal than the follicular phase in humans. In rats, prolactin levels peak shortly before the preovulatory LH surge that causes ovulation, a time when estrogen levels are high. Prolactin levels also increase during pregnancy, decrease just before birth, and increase again as a response to suckling.The role of prolactin in lactation is its best-studied and probably most important function. In all mammals, prolactin acts on the mammary gland to prepare and maintain its secretory activity. It causes the growth of ductal and lobuloalveolar tissues and causes increases in mRNA levels and translation of the milk protein, casein. Prolactin release is stimulated directly by suckling and results in the synthesis of milk. In addition, there is a relationship between suckling and the inhibition of reproductive function, as suckling can delay implantation of fetuses conceived during a postpartum estrus or cause long periods of anovulation. Prolactin may also play a role in maternal behavior, although this is not well understood.Prolactin can infl uence the reproductive axis through its actions on the ovary. There, prolactin causes increases in LH receptors in the corpus luteum, progesterone synthesis by the corpus luteum, and high-and low-density lipoprotein binding in membranes of the corpus luteum. These functions may be related to uterine endometrial development and implantation of the blastocyst in rats, although it is not clear if this is the case in humans.Other functions of prolactin include osmoregulation, primarily in fi sh and amphibians. The expression of prolactin receptors in kidney, gut, skin, and urinary bladder is consistent with this role. Prolactin receptors have a widespread distribution throughout the body of many species. Predictably, they are abundant in mammary gland, but they are also found in other tissues involved in reproduction, as well as the liver, kidney, gastrointestinal tract, and brain. Thus, it is likely that prolactin may play roles in these tissues that are independent of lactation or reproductive function.Pulsatile and Circadian Release of Prolactin. Like the other pituitary hormones, prolactin is released from the anterior pituitary in a pulsatile manner. Its release is entrained to the 24-h clock, similar to other hormones. This appears to be a diurnal rhythm, as it is driven by sleep cues rather than the circadian clock, similar to its related hormone, growth hormone Prolactin is a member of the somatotropin (growth hormone) family of molecules. Its gene shares consid- Other hypothalamic factors shown, TRH and OT, are thought to regulate the prolactin system, although their roles are less well defi ned than that of dopamine. In all cases a unilateral projection is shown, although this regulation occurs bilaterally. Right: The structure of dopamine is shown, and general structural information about the PRL sequence provided. Abbreviations: ARC, arcuate nucleus; DA, dopamine; OT, oxytocin; PRL, prolactin; PVN, paraventricular nucleus; SON, supraoptic nucleus; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; iii, third ventricle.erable homology with the growth hormone gene. The prolactin protein is a 23-to 24-kDa protein containing three disulfi de bridges, giving it a unique structure. There are multiple forms of the prolactin receptor, and its expression is widespread throughout the body. Isoforms of the prolactin receptor range in size from 329 to 591 amino acids and they have structural overlap with cytokine receptor family members. Prolactin receptors are found in the mammary gland, liver, kidney, adrenals, gonads, uterus, placenta, prostate, seminal vesicles, lymphoid tissues, intestine, choroid plexus, hypothalamus, and other tissues.The major hypothalamic population of dopamine neurons believed to regulate prolactin release is called the tuberoinfundibular dopaminergic system, also referred to as the A12 cell group. Their perikarya lie in arcuate nuclei At the anterior pituitary gland, dopamine binds to the D2 subtype of dopamine receptor on lactotropes to cause its inhibitory effects on the synthesis and release of prolactin. The binding of dopamine to the D2 receptor causes a decrease in cAMP concentrations in lactotropes and causes an inhibition of prolactin gene transcription. Another second messenger system, the Ca 2+ /phosphokinase C system, may also play a role in this process, although this latter mechanism is not well understood.As discussed earlier, prolactin release is regulated by neurotransmitters other than dopamine. The hypothalamic hormone thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), the primary function of which is the regulation of the thyroid hormone axis, also has been shown to stimulate prolactin release. Another neuropeptide, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), can stimulate prolactin release, and blockade of the VIP system with antisera inhibits basal prolactin secretion. In addition, oxytocin neurons regulate the prolactin system, possibly through direct actions on lactotrope cells Hyperprolactinemia is the elevated secretion of prolactin. This is a common human pituitary disorder and can be a result of disrupted dopamine transmission, which normally would suppress prolactin release. Hyperprolactinemia can result from pituitary adenomas that secrete prolactin. As a result of hyperprolactinemia, inappropriate lactation can occur, as can be the case with drugs that affect the dopamine system (neuroleptics, dopamine receptor blockers, antidepressants, antihypertensives, oral contraceptives).Although the major focus of this chapter is the regulation of anterior pituitary function by hypothalamic releasing/inhibiting factors, following is a brief discussion of the hypothalamic neurons that innervate the posterior gland, specifi cally, arginine vasopressin (AVP) and oxytocin (OT) neurons. Further discussion of these hormones is found in Chapters 39 and 7, respectively.The oxytocin and AVP neuropeptides are synthesized from genes localized on the same chromosome, but they are in a "head to head" organization separated by a domain called the intergenic region. Therefore, these genes are transcribed in opposite directions ( genes are structurally similar, comprising three exons that encode a signal peptide, the neuropeptide (either AVP or OT), and a neurophysin whose function is not entirely known but may be involved in chaperoning the neuropeptides as they are processed in secretory vesicles ( AVP and OT have numerous functions in the brain and body, and a brief discussion of their diverse neuroendocrine-neurohypophysial functions is provided here. For further details, refer to Oxytocin is best known for its roles related to parturition and milk ejection in mammals. OT plays roles in uterine contraction during delivery. With regard to lactation, OT responds to the suckling stimulus by stimulating contraction of the cells around the alveoli of the mammary gland to stimulate milk ejection. OT, together with AVP, plays key roles in social behaviors related to successful reproduction, such maternal and paternal behaviors and pair bonding Effects of OT and AVP are mediated by their specifi c receptors, localized in various target organs. To date, one OT receptor and three AVP receptors (V1a, V1b, V2) have been identifi ed The hypothalamic-neurohypophysial AVP and OT neurons have large cell bodies that are 20-40 mm in diameter, and are referred to as magnocellular neurons (as opposed to their parvocellular counterparts of 10-15 mm). These cells are localized in two major hypothalamic regions: the supraoptic nucleus (SON), comprised entirely of magnocellular neurons; and the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), which has both magnocellular and parvocellular divisions In order for steroid hormones to be able to exert effects on brain and behavior, they must have specifi c steroid hormone receptor-positive targets. The hypothalamus, the site of steroid hormone regulatory feedback, is a predictable target for steroid hormones. Indeed, the hypothalamus and related regions such as preoptic area are abundant in estrogen receptors (ERs), androgen receptors (ARs), and progesterone receptors (PRs), which can be detected even during fetal development The brain is sexually differentiated, meaning that there are morphological, anatomical, and functional differences between males and females. In mammals and many other vertebrates, these differences appear to be established, or "organized," in late gestation and early postnatal life, due to early hormonal exposures. The developing fetus is exposed not only to its own gonadal hormones, but also to maternal and environmental factors, exposures to all of which have permanent effects on brain development, and ultimately, on adult neural and behavioral functions.The early effects of sex steroid hormones are mediated by specifi c receptors that are abundant in the hypothalamus and other brain regions. Two examples of brain regions that are particularly sensitive to perinatal sex steroid exposure and are sexually differentiated include (but are not limited to) specifi c hypothalamic and preoptic areas, as well as the spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus (SNB), the latter which innervates the base of the penis or clitoris. Perinatal differences in sex steroid hormones act to alter the size of these brain regions such that they differ between males and females; in general, because the fetal testis is much more active than the ovary, testicular hormones are responsible for these neuroanatomical changes.Although it might be predicted that testosterone is responsible for these effects in males, depending upon the brain region, it is often testosterone's metabolite, 17b-estradiol, that is much more potent in many of these actions in mammalian species. Testosterone is a direct precursor to estradiol, metabolized by the P450 aromatase enzyme. This enzyme is found in the hypothalamus, as well as many other brain regions that are steroid sensitive. The perinatal organizational effects of testosterone and estradiol are crucial in order for normal sex-specifi c reproductive physiology and behavior to occur in adulthood. These behaviors also require further actions of gonadal steroid hormones, which are secreted in increasing amounts during the pubertal process. These so-called activational effects of steroids at puberty require that normal organization has occurred early in life. It is also becoming clear that the pubertal period is characterized by continued development of the brain, including neural plasticity that is modulated by steroid hormones. Thus, puberty may be considered as a second organizational period, as well as one during which activation of neonatallyorganized circuits occurs The issue of sexual dimorphism in the human brain has been quite controversial, but there is no question that there is strong evidence for morphological and functional differences in specifi c brain nuclei in humans Structures that are larger in the healthy female brain, relative to cerebrum size Structures that are larger in the healthy male brain, relative to cerebrum size Anterior Posterior FIGURE 40.10 (This legend is quoted from the review by There are clearly differences in the sexual behavior of males and females, which are dependent upon organizational and activational effects of gonadal steroid hormones. For example, copulatory behavior in male rodents comprises mounts of the female by the male, penile intromissions, and ejaculations. A receptive female rodent will respond to male copulatory behaviors with a lordosis response, characterized by a rigid stance and an arched back. These behaviors are driven in large part by the responses of hypothalamic nuclei to hormones, and the nature of the adult behavior is determined by the prenatal/neonatal exposure to hormones. Thus, the hypothalamus of adult males, which has been masculinized neonatally by testicular testosterone (aromatized to estradiol), will respond to the testosterone produced by the adult gonad (metabolized to DHT) by causing the typical male pattern of sexual behavior. In contrast, the female hypothalamus, which is not exposed neonatally to suffi cient levels of ovarian hormones to cause masculinization of her brain, responds to estrogen produced by her adult ovary with the appropriate female lordotic response. Moreover, a normal adult male will not express lordosis behavior in response to exogenous estrogen, nor will a normal adult female exhibit male-typical sexual behaviors in response to exogenous testosterone, as their brains have not been organized in such as way as to produce a gender-inappropriate response in adulthood. However, a neonatally castrated male can respond to estradiol in adulthood with the expression of lordosis behavior, as his brain was not masculinized neonatally. Similarly, a female who was exposed to exogenous testosterone or estradiol neonatally can exhibit male-typical sexual behaviors as an adult if she is treated with testosterone.It is necessary to distinguish between masculinizing and defeminizing effects of hormones in females, and the feminizing and demasculinizing effects of hormones in males. As mentioned earlier, female sexual behavior in rats is characterized most overtly by lordosis. The prevention of this behavior by exposure to sex steroid hormones neonatally would be an example of a defeminizing effect. In contrast, a female rat whose brain has been exposed to steroid hormones at birth, and in adulthood is injected with testosterone, may exhibit male-typical sexual behavior such as mounting another female. This is an example of the masculinizing effects of hormones. For males, the feminizing effects of hormones could be seen in a neonatally castrated male who, as an adult, is exposed to female sex steroids and responds with lordosis behavior in response to the mounting by another male. Demasculinization would occur in this male if, as an adult, he fails to perform normal male-typical sexual behavior (mounts, intro missions, ejaculations) in response to a female. Thus, hormones can cause both of these effects in males or females, depending on the time and duration of exposure.The regions of the brain responsible for sex behavior differ between males and females. Sexual behavior in male rodents is largely driven by the preoptic area (POA) of the brain, just rostral to the hypothalamus, although other regions contribute to this process. Lesions of the POA in males cause the loss of sexual behavior, and testosterone implanted into the POA can induce sex behavior. In female rodents, the primary hypothalamic site regulating receptive sexual behavior is the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMH), although as in males, other regions also play contributing roles. Estradiol, followed by progesterone, facilitates the expression of the lordosis refl ex and coordinates the timing of female receptivity with the preovulatory GnRH/LH surge that causes ovulation. Thus, the timing of mating behavior and ovulation is coordinated by the release of ovarian steroid hormones. During the reproductive cycle, circulating estrogen levels increase, and estrogen binds to its receptor in the VMH to cause the transcription of several genes, including that of the progesterone receptor. Then, progesterone levels rise and can bind to its newly induced receptor in the VMH. This causes proceptive behaviors in females and facilitates the lordosis response. Females that have been androgenized neonatally have a large reduction in the lordosis response to exogenous estrogen and progesterone replacement.Reproductive behavior in many species involves signals from pheromones, which are chemical signals used for communication between animals The ability to detect pheromones involves the vomeronasal organ, an auxiliary olfactory organ found near the nasal cavity, and its projections to the accessory olfactory bulbs. Cells in these latter regions contact a number of brain regions, including the medial amygdala, cortical regions, and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, all of which are implicated in sex behavior. These regions in turn project to the hypothalamus and preoptic area. Thus, information from pheromones about mating status can be conveyed to parts of the brain coordinating reproductive physiology and behavior.In most species, information about reproductive status, dominance status, or other social cues can be conveyed by pheromones, although it is still controversial whether humans have a vomeronasal organ and/or can sense pheromones. Those organisms using pheromones as chemosensory cues have developed mechanisms for depositing or releasing pheromones to "advertise" sexual competency or receptivity in order to attract a mate or to mark territory, to protect food supplies, mates, or offspring. Pheromones and the systems that mediate their effects play broader roles than those involved in reproductive physiology and behavior. Pheromones can dramatically infl uence the timing of sexual development and function. In female mice, exposure to male urinary pheromones accelerates the timing of pubertal development. Males respond to female urinary pheromones with sharp increases in luteinizing hormone release. It has also been reported that pheromones can coordinate the timing of reproductive cycles, even in humans, although the mechanisms and functions of these pheromones are still controversial and poorly understood. Nevertheless, it is clear that pheromones play important roles in coordinating physiology and behavior. Life on Earth has adapted to the cyclic variation in conditions imposed by our planet's daily rotation on its axis and its annual revolution around the sun. Almost all organisms studied, from cyanobacteria to Homo sapiens, have intrinsic time-keeping systems that adjust physiology and behavior to anticipate the daily cycles of light and darkness. Physiological processes that vary over the 24-hour day include activity, alertness, hormone secretion, organ physiology, and gene expression. These variations are not merely passive responses to a rhythmic environment, but instead refl ect an underlying biological mechanism that can measure time on a 24-hour time scale. This mechanism orchestrates physiology to achieve predictive, rather than reactive, homeostasis.Biological time measurement on the 24-hour time scale is achieved by a circadian timing mechanism. The term circadian is derived from the Latin words circa and diem, meaning "about a day," referring to the cycle length of these rhythms. Circadian rhythms are defi ned as rhythms that persist with a cycle length of approximately 24 hours in constant environmental conditions In this chapter, we will present the current state of knowledge regarding the mammalian circadian timing system, including discussion of the molecular basis for oscillations within individual cells, and the anatomical and neurochemical substrates regulating circadian rhythmicity.A biological timing system in its simplest form consists of an intrinsic clock mechanism that measures time, an input mechanism that allows the clock to become synchronized or reset by changes in the environment, and output pathways that lead to generation of overt rhythms such as daily changes in locomotor activity, sleep, and hormone levels. The mammalian circadian timing system is considerably more complicated than this simple linear scheme, because it is composed of a hierarchy of circadian oscillators The primary input pathway to the SCN circadian clock is through retinal detection of light. Remarkably, the retinal photoreceptors that lead to visual image formation are not needed for circadian photoreception. Instead, a specialized population of intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells detect light and also project directly to the SCN. In rodents, the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT) is composed primarily of the axons of these specialized ganglion cells, and the RHT is necessary for synchronization of the SCN clock to light.Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition FIGURE 41.1 Locomotor activity rhythm of a mouse. This fi gure is a "double-plotted actogram" that shows the activity pattern of an adult mouse housed individually in a cage with a running wheel. When the mouse rotates the wheel by running within it, a computerized system detects and records the wheel revolutions and then can be used to plot the wheel revolutions (as bars coming up from the baseline, with their height proportional to the number of revolutions) versus time, for weeks of data. Each horizontal line represents 48 hours of data. On the fi rst line of the record, the fi rst 48 hours of data are shown. In the second line of the record, the data shown are from hours 24-72 of data collection. Thus, each 24-hour period of data after the fi rst 24 hr is shown both to the right of and below the previous day's data; this artifi cial reproduction of the data (doubleplotting) helps to see the rhythmicity when the cycle length of rhythmicity differs from 24 hours (see for example The SCN have been recognized as the master circadian clock in rodents since the early 1970s Lesion studies leading to loss of rhythmicity do not necessarily show that the SCN function as the primary circadian pacemaker. An alternative possibility is that the SCN could be a necessary element on a key output pathway leading to physiological rhythmicity, rather than a pacemaker. The presence of rhythms in SCN metabolic activity, electrical activity, and gene expression profi les in vivo do not distinguish between these possibilities. Studies demonstrating rhythms in neuropeptide secretion, metabolic activity, and electrical fi ring rate in SCN tissue maintained in vitro do show that the SCN contain a functional oscillator. The SCN do not simply oscillate, however; through their outputs, the SCN regulate rhythms in physiology and behavior, and thus serve as a circadian pacemaker. This pacemaker role of the SCN is revealed most clearly by studies showing that locomotor activity rhythms can be restored in hamsters by transplanting fetal SCN tissue into the hypothalamus of animals previously made arrhythmic by SCN lesion. Furthermore, transplants between hamsters with different circadian periods reveal that the cycle length (period) of restored rhythmicity is dictated by the genotype of the SCN tissue donor and not by the recipient The SCN are the master circadian pacemakers in mammalian brain. The SCN oscillate in vivo, and also when placed in vitro. More importantly, however, the SCN generate output signals that lead to physiological and behavioral rhythms. Critical to the function of the SCN as the master pacemaker is its position at the interface between the outside world (detected primarily by retinal photoreception) and the light-insensitive tissues that comprise the rest of the body.The rodent SCN are composed of approximately 10,000 neurons per side of the brain, with heterogeneity of neuropeptide phenotype, connectivity, and other properties The cycle lengths of individual oscillating SCN cells are much more variable than the periods of animal behavior or the period observed for rhythms (e.g., in neuropeptide secretion) from slices of SCN tissue maintained in vitro. Thus, some mechanisms for interaction among the heterogeneous SCN neurons must occur for SCN neurons to synchronize their diverse periods to an intermediate value, to coordinate their phase (timing), and thus to provide a coherent output The entire population of SCN neurons usually functions in concert as an orchestrating oscillator. Under specifi c conditions, however, SCN cells can be induced to become coupled into two functionally relevant subpopulations that can independently infl uence circadian behavior. For example, by long-term exposure to constant light, the left and right hamster SCN can be induced to oscillate in opposite phases, with each side regulating locomotor activity, leading to activity profi les with two peaks per 24 hours (de la For many years, the widely accepted dogma in the circadian fi eld was that only the SCN possessed the capacity for self-sustaining, autonomous rhythmicity. The identifi cation of a family of mammalian Period genes (homologues of period, a gene essential for circadian rhythmicity in Drosophila) helped to change this perception. The mammalian Period genes are widely expressed It is now generally believed that most mammalian cell types are capable of circadian rhythmicity. In normal circumstances, the rhythmicity in tissues outside the SCN is synchronized by SCN-dependent output signals. These signals include daily fl uctuations in hormone levels (e.g., melatonin and glucocorticoids) and other physiological and behavioral rhythms (e.g., body temperature and food intake). Thus, there is a hierarchy of oscillators within the body. Rhythmic outputs controlled by the SCN serve as inputs to peripheral oscillators, synchronizing molecular rhythmicity among cells within a peripheral tissue The SCN generally function as master circadian pacemakers, but there is now compelling evidence that, under specifi c circumstances, oscillators in other brain areas including the dorsomedial hypothalamus can regulate circadian behavior in the absence of the SCN Many cell types possess the capacity for circadian oscillation. Neurons within the SCN oscillate, and also communicate with each other, such that the SCN are able to provide a coherent output resulting in rhythmicity of other functions. Oscillating cells in other tissues generally require occasional SCN-dependent input to remain synchronized. In some cases, however, cell-cell communication is adequate to maintain coordinated cellular rhythmicity in a tissue even in the absence of SCN input.The preceding discussion emphasizes that circadian rhythmicity occurs within single, isolated cells. How do individual cells measure 24-hour time intervals? Studies conducted in many labs over the past 10 years have revealed a great deal about the molecular mechanisms for mammalian circadian rhythmicity Progress made in understanding the circadian clock mechanisms in the fruit fl y, Drosophila melanogaster, was instrumental in developing our current understanding of mammalian clock mechanisms. Most of the genes involved in the fl y circadian mechanism have mammalian homologs, and their roles in circadian function have now been examined in mammals. Although there have been some alterations in gene products performing specifi c functions, and gene duplication in mammals has led to greater complexity, the general features of the core clock mechanism are similar between fl ies and mammals (Box 41.1).The molecular mechanism for measuring time on a 24-hour time-scale is based on a self-sustaining transcriptional/translational feedback loop present within individual cells Benzer's pioneering idea of using unbiased genetic screens to identify genes involved in circadian behavior has led to identifi cation of additional "clock genes" by several other labs. The subsequent genetic, molecular, and biochemical studies have led to a remarkably detailed understanding of the Drosophila circadian pacemaker Model of the molecular circadian clock in Drosophila. In the core transcriptional feedback loop (left side of the fi gure), CLOCK (CLK) and CYCLE (CYC) positively regulate period (per) and timeless (tim) transcription. PER is phosphorylated by DOUBLE-TIME (DBT) and CASEIN KINASE II (CKII), while TIM is phosphorylated by SHAGGY (SGG). PER phosphorylation is also negatively regulated by PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 2A. PER and TIM enter into the nucleus with DBT to inhibit the activity of CLK/CYC. In a secondary feedback loop shown in grey, VRILLE (VRI) and PAR DOMAIN PROTEIN 1e (PDP1) regulate clk transcription. the CLK/CYC dimer and disrupts its interaction with E-box sequences. The inhibition of per and tim gene expression is maintained for several hours, until the hyperphosphorylated and unstable PER and TIM proteins decay. CLK/CYC can once again bind to E-Box sequences and restart the circadian cycle. The kinase DOUBLETIME, which translocates into the nucleus with PER and TIM, may also play an important role for repression by regulating CLK phosphorylation and degradation. The CLK/CYC, PER/TIM feedback loop is essential for maintaining rhythms in Drosophila. There is a secondary feedback loop that appears to contribute to the precision and robustness of circadian oscillations through the regulation of clk mRNA levels.The Drosophila molecular clock is synchronized primarily to environmental light/dark cycles by an intracellular photoreceptor, CRYPTOCHROME (CRY). Light activates CRY, and CRY then binds to and triggers the rapid degradation of TIM. Since TIM stabilizes PER, the degradation of TIM also results in a reduction in PER levels that resets the circadian pacemaker.Despite the ability of cells throughout the fl y to respond directly to light, there is increasing evidence for important interactions between oscillatory neurons in the regulation of behavior. About 150 neurons in the Drosophila brain have been identifi ed as putative clock neurons due to their expression of circadian proteins, including PER As the fi rst components of the mammalian molecular clock were identifi ed in the late 1990s, it quickly became clear that important concepts learned from the Drosophila circadian clock also apply to mammals. At the molecular level, the circadian pacemaker of both Drosophila and mammals involve homologous proteins in analogous transcriptional feedback loops. Interestingly, the fi rst identifi ed genetic cause of a human circadian rhythm disorder, familial advanced sleep phase syndrome, is due to a mutation in human Per2, a human homolog of the Drosophila per gene (Box 41.2). Furthermore, recent studies suggest that the neural mechanisms controlling Drosophila circadian behavior may also provide useful insights on mammalian circadian rhythms. In mammals, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) plays a similar role as PDF in the fl y. In both systems, a small subset of peptide-expressing pacemaker cells remain rhythmic under constant conditions, and are believed to synchronize each other and maintain rhythmicity in other clock cells. Moreover, mutations affecting the Drosophila and mammalian ligands (PDF or VIP) or their receptors lead to a loss of coordinated rhythms among the clock neurons, resulting in arrhythmic behavior after several days in constant conditions. Thus, even the mechanisms that coordinate neurons of the circadian network appear to have been preserved, despite gross differences in the anatomy of insect and mammalian brains. several basic helix-loop-helix, PAS-domain containing (bHLH-PAS) transcription factors (CLOCK and BMAL1, or NPAS2 and BMAL1) activate transcription of several genes, including Period and Cryptochrome genes, through E-box elements. High-amplitude rhythmicity in the rate of transcription of two Period genes (Per1 and Per2; An interlocked, second feedback loop is important for the rhythmic regulation of BMAL1. Among the Ebox driven genes regulated by CLOCK and BMAL1 are two members of the orphan nuclear receptor gene family, Rev-erb-alpha and Rora. The protein products of these genes compete for binding to a orphan nuclear receptor binding site in the promoter of the Bmal1 gene, and have antagonistic effects on Bmal1 gene expression. Overexpression of the repressor, REV-ERB-a, in the liver greatly reduces Bmal1 expression in this tissue, leading to loss of tissue-autonomous rhythmicity The importance of the genes just discussed in the circadian mechanism has been revealed in part through studies of mice with targeted gene disruption. Thesestudies reveal that, in most cases, there is at least partial redundancy of function among members of these gene families An exception to the general rule of redundancy within gene families is BMAL1, which is necessary for maintenance of behavioral rhythmicity. A closely related protein, BMAL2, is not able to substitute for BMAL1 in maintaining behavioral rhythmicity.Genes that participate in the core negative feedback loop and are necessary for its function are called "clock genes." The impact of the molecular feedback loop from brains collected at the time of peak Per transcript levels during the subjective day (left column) or during the middle of the subjective night (right column) were processed for in situ hybridization to detect mPer1 and mPer2 mRNAs. "Subjective" refers to the fact that the animals were in constant darkness on the day of tissue collection, rather than in a lighting cycle. The SCN are indicated by an arrowhead in each panel. Right: Per RNA (open circles and dashed lines) and PER protein (fi lled circles and solid lines) rhythms in mouse SCN. mPer1 (upper panel) and mPer2 (lower panel) RNA levels were assessed by in situ hybridization from samples collected on the fi rst day in constant darkness. Protein levels were determined by counting nuclei within the SCN from sections processed for immunohistochemical detection of mPER1 and mPER2. The bar below the panel represents the lighting cycle the animals were exposed to on days prior to the day of tissue collection. Circadian time 0-12 corresponds to subjective day, when the lights would have been on had the animals remained in a lighting cycle.The normal timing of sleep in young adult humans is from approximately 11 p.m. to 7 a.m. Most people will voluntarily move sleep to a later time when free of work constraints, and readily readjust their schedule back to an earlier time when the work week begins again. Several disorders affecting the timing of sleep and wake have been described, however, that affect the timing of sleep.Based on information discussed elsewhere in this chapter, the most obvious disorder would be "Non-24-hour sleep wake syndrome," in which individuals fail to entrain to the 24-hour day. This is relatively frequent in blind individuals, and is likely due to inadequate input to the SCN via the retinohypothalamic tract. These individuals have intervals where their biological day and night coincide with the solar day and night, but then the difference between their free-running period (usually ∼ 24.5 hours) and the 24-hour day causes them to drift out of phase with the environment. This results in periods of insomnia and daytime drowsiness (when the individuals are out-of-phase) alternating with periods of coordination with the environment. Melatonin, administered at 24-hour intervals, is useful in synchronizing some blind individuals to a 24-hour cycle length.Two additional disorders are delayed sleep phase syndrome (DSPS) and advanced sleep phase insomnia (ASPS). The former is characterized by late awakening and late bedtimes (typical wake interval from noon to 0400), and an apparent inability to reset the clock to earlier times of day. This disorder frequently begins in adolescence or in college, but is frequently noticed when individuals enter the working world as young adults; it is not considered unusual for young adults to have late-shifted schedules. ASPS, in contrast, is characterized by early morning awakening and an inability to maintain wakefulness into the evening (typical wake interval is from 0400 to 2000).Studies of familial cases of ASPS have identifi ed two genes which, when mutated, contribute to ASPS. Remarkably, these genes were already discussed in the context of the core circadian feedback loop defi ned in mice. The mutations defi ned in humans are a Serine → Glycine mutation at position 662 of human PER2 (within the casein kinase interacting domain of PER2), and a Threonine → Alanine mutation at position 44 of casein kinase I delta (a mutation that destroys the ability of the kinase to phosphorylate substrates, including PER2). Many cases of ASPS are sporadic, and there is a natural tendency for normal, healthy elderly to live in an advanced phase (for reasons that are unclear). Nevertheless, fi nding that ASPS can be linked to mutations in human genes that are part of the core circadian oscillator strongly suggests that clock mechanisms studied in mice provide important information on the regulation of human rhythmicity.Environmentally induced sleep disruption is perhaps more familiar. Jet lag is induced by fl ying across several time zones, and represents the lack of coordination of the fl yer's body to the new local time. Individuals usually entrain to a phase-shifted environment at the rate of about 1 hour per day, although careful control over when light exposure occurs may improve this rate.Another environmentally imposed disruption of circadian rhythms and sleep occurs with shift work. Most people working the night shift remain entrained to the solar day, so that their biological rhythms (e.g., alertness, temperature, and hormonal rhythms) are in opposition to the demands of the work schedule. Some of the negative health effects of shift work may be due to the stress caused by trying to sleep when the biological clock dictates it is time to be awake, and trying to be alert and productive when our body expects rest. Clear performance defi cits occur when individuals attempt to work for extended periods, ignoring the need for sleep and the deterimental effects of performing complex job tasks at an adverse circadian phase.Jones, C. R., Campbell, S. S., Zone, S. E. et al. Additional genes not listed may modify the circadian feedback loop in more subtle ways. Only mutations that disrupt gene function are listed; some of these proteins also produce a circadian phenotype when their protein product is overexpressed (e.g., in transgenic animals).occurs through the rhythmic regulation of additional genes, so-called "clock-controlled genes," which are distinguished from clock genes by the fact that they do not feed back on the core oscillatory mechanism in a manner that makes them necessary for rhythmicity. Some clock-controlled genes with E-box elements in their regulatory regions are controlled in the same manner as Pers and Crys: their transcription is activated directly by CLOCK : BMAL1 and inhibited by the activity of the PER/CRY complexes disrupting this transcriptional activation. The regulation of arginine vasopressin (AVP) in the SCN is a prototype for this mechanism Notably, products of some genes regulated by the CLOCK : BMAL1 complex are themselves able to regulate transcription through additional regulatory elements. For example, a family of D-element binding proteins (DBP/TEF/TBP and E4BP4) are controlled via E-box elements, and these proteins compete for occupation of elements in responsive genes. Thus, the rhythmic regulation of these transcription factors, and the multiple regulatory element combinations that can occur in responsive genes, results in a cascade leading to rhythmic gene expression with many possible peak times of expression and with tissue-specifi c regulation The molecular basis for circadian oscillation is a transcriptional feedback loop. For rhythmic gene expression, a phase of transcriptional activation alternates with a phase of transcriptional repression, and the cycle length of this rhythm is approximately 24 hours. The bHLH-PAS proteins CLOCK and NPAS2 heterodimerize with BMAL1 to produce E-box dependent transcriptional activation. Among the genes controlled primarily by E-box regulation are Per1 and Per2; their high-amplitude temporal regulation is critical to determining the timing of the phase of transcriptional repression, through regulating the formation of inhibitory complexes containing PER, CRY, and casein kinase proteins. Casein kinases phosphorylate the PER proteins, infl uencing their abundance and activity. This is likely important for building a posttranslational time delay into the feedback loop. The CRY proteins are the primary inhibitory components of the complex. In parallel with the regulation of "clock genes," the feedback loop regulates the expression of effector genes and also of transcription factors that widen the infl uence of the circadian clock to affect key (often rate-limiting) metabolic steps in a tissue-specifi c manner.In the following sections, we will discuss the mechanisms by which the circadian clock in the mammalian SCN is synchronized to the daily light : dark cycle.The intrinsic period of the circadian pacemaker is revealed by measuring it in constant environmental conditions, or in animals made insensitive to light (e.g., by removal of the eyes). Rhythms that are not entrained (e.g., not synchronized by a rhythmic environmental cue) are referred to as "free-running" rhythms The period length of rhythms that are freerunning is usually not exactly 24 hours In assessing the response of the circadian system to light, it is often more informative to assess the response of animals to brief light pulses rather than to full lightdark cycles In mammals, detection of light by the circadian system requires the presence of the retina. Remark-FIGURE 41.8 Schematic representation of the phase-dependent phase shifts that occur following exposure of free-running animals to brief pulses of light. (A-E) Each panel represents an actogram of one animal housed in constant darkness and exposed to one, 1-hr light pulse (yellow box). The phase shift is the difference, on the day of the light pulse, between a line drawn through activity onsets before the light pulse (blue lines) with a line through activity onsets after the light pulse (yellow line). In some cases, the behavioral shift is not complete on the fi rst cycle after the light exposure, and the shift seems to occur over several days. The intermediate activity onsets are called "transients" and are ignored when determining the phase after the shift. (F) Phase response curve. The phase shift induced by a brief light pulse is highly dependent upon the time at which the light exposure occurred. Circadian time (CT) 12 is defi ned as the time of activity onset in a nocturnal animal. Light exposure occurring during the biological daytime (CT 0-12) does not cause a shift. Responses occur only during the animals' biological nighttime. Early in the subjective night, light exposure delays the clock, so activity begins at a later time on subsequent cycles. (C) Late in the subjective night, light exposure causes a phase advance as detected by earlier activity onsets after the light pulse. (D,E) Phase-dependent phase shifts allow the circadian oscillator to be entrained to environmental cycles. ably, however, the retinal photoreceptors that are required for visual image formation are not needed for circadian photoreception. Studies of mutant mice show that circadian sensitivity to light persists even in mice with virtually complete loss of the rods and cones. Other nonvisual responses to light (inhibition of locomotor activity, suppression of nocturnal melatonin secretion, and pupillary constriction) also occur in the absence of rods and cones. These fi ndings suggest that a photoreceptive protein expressed in the inner retina mediates nonvisual responses to light.In mammals, a small percentage of retinal ganglion cells express an opsin-like pigment, melanopsin, that initially was identifi ed as a putative photopigment in the light-responsive dermal melanophores of frog skin A direct anatomical connection from the retina to the SCN, the RHT, was fi rst identifi ed in the early 1970s. The axons of melanopsin-containing ipRGCs comprise the majority (ca. 80%) of the RHT fi bers Despite being well-positioned to serve as the circadian photoreceptive molecule, melanopsin is in fact not the only photopigment involved in circadian photoreception. Melanopsin-defi cient mice have a reduction in the effects of light on phase shifting, negative masking of locomotor activity, and pupillary responses at high light intensities, but these responses do persist so long as rods and cones are intact. Importantly, mice that lack rod and cone function and also lack melanopsin appear completely blind with respect to both image formation and nonimage forming responses to light The melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion cells that project to the SCN in the retinohypothalamic tract use glutamate as their primary neurotransmitter. A large percentage of these retinal neurons also contain the neuropeptides Substance P and/or Pituitary Adenylate Cyclase Activating Peptide (PACAP). Application of these agents to SCN slices in vitro causes phase-dependent phase shifts of intrinsic SCN rhythms. Furthermore, glutamate receptor antagonists block light-induced phase shifts in vivo, revealing the functional importance of glutamatergic input to the SCN.Axon collaterals of the melanopsin-positive retinal ganglion cells innervate neurons in the intergeniculate leafl et that express neuropeptide Y (NPY). These NPYcontaining neurons project to the SCN as the geniculohypothalamic tract. The geniculohypothalamic tract is thought to play a major role in nonphotic phase shifting, a phenomenon in which behavioral arousal (usually accompanied by intense locomotor activity) during the circadian day leads to increased NPY release FIGURE 41.9 Circadian photoreception occurs primarily through retinal ganglion cells containing melanopsin. (A) Melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion cells in the mammalian retina have large dendritic trees. These cells are ill-suited for spatial localization, but are ideally suited for luminance detection. This image shows an ipRGC's immunolabeled with an anti-melanopsin antiserum, in a fl at-mounted human retina. Melanopsin immunoreactivity appears green. Note the localization of melanopsin in the cell body and throughout the dendritic arbor rendering the entire cell photosensitive. Also note the characteristic varicosities decorating the dendrites. Image provided by Ignacio Provencio, University of Virginia. Scale bar = 100 microns. (B) The SCN receives a strong, bilateral input from melanopsin-containing RGCs. Central projections of melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion cells were detected using a beta-galactosidase reporter gene inserted into the melanopsin locus. Tissue was processed for histochemical detection of beta-galactosidase activity, resulting in deposition of blue reaction product in cells and processes containing melanopsin. Melanopsin-containing cell bodies are present only in the retina, so the blue staining seen in the brain represents axons of these retinal neurons. The right eye of the animal had been removed over 2 weeks prior to staining. Labeled, retinal fi bers in the optic tract (ot) have degenerated on the apparent left side of the image, leaving weak, granular labeling. The staining in the SCN remains strong on both sides, indicating the extensive, bilateral projections to the SCN. (In contrast, other projections of these cells are ∼95% crossed.) Melanopsin-containing processes also extend into the subparaventricular zone (SPZ). Scale bar = 100 microns. (C) Central projections of melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells, detected using beta-galactosidase activity as discussed in panel B. The olivary pretectal nucleus (OPN) and intergeniculate leafl et (IGL) receive a crossed input from melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion cells. Image provided by Samer Hattar, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine . (D) Melanopsin is localized within a subset of retinal projections. The anatomical level is comparable to Panel C. The projections of the entire population of retinal ganglion cells were revealed by intraocular injection of cholera toxin B (CTB) subunit three days prior to tissue collection, allowing anterograde labeling of the fi bers of all retinal ganglion, followed by detection of the toxin (green). Note the intense labeling of the dorsal subdivision of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGd). Melanopsin expression in retinal terminals was detected by red immunofl uorescence; in this merged image, the overlap of red and green channels in the melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells yields yellow labeling in the IGL and OPN. Scale bar in D (applies to C and D) = 500 microns. Image provided by David Berson, Brown University . (E) Schematic illustration of the axonal projections of melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion cell. Principle targets (SCN, OPN, IGL, and lateral habenula Panel A is a double-plotted actogram of a control mouse showing normal entrainment to the light : dark cycle. Panel B shows a double-plotted actogram from a triple-mutant mouse, lacking rod and cone phototransduction mechanisms and also lacking melanopsin. Triple-mutant animals free-run as though there is no lighting cycle. Triple-mutant animals also lack pupillary constriction responses and acute inhibition of locomotor activity by light within the SCN and leads to a phase shift of activity rhythms. The indirect retinal pathway through the intergeniculate leafl et also appears to modulate photic entrainment.The direct RHT and the indirect retino-geniculohypothalamic pathway converge in the SCN, in the "core" region defi ned by the dense retinal input and by a subpopulation of neurons expressing vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). As noted earlier, VIP appears to play a key role in synchronizing the activity of SCN neurons. Another major input to the SCN core is a serotonergic input from the raphe nuclei, which mod- Per1 and Per2 gene expression are rhythmic in the SCN, with high levels during the daytime Although light does not infl uence Per levels during the animal's subjective daytime and does not cause phase shifts at this time, nonphotic manipulations can cause phase shifts when administered during the daytime (e.g., novelty-induced voluntary locomotor activity, arousal, serotonin receptor activation). These manipulations lead to reduced Per gene expression in the SCN. Thus, acute regulation of Per gene expression may be the mechanism by which a variety of manipulations affect circadian phase.The circadian clock in the SCN is entrained to the daily light-dark cycle by light causing phasedependent phase shifts each day. The retinae are  Neurons of the core region project heavily within the SCN, to both the core and the surrounding "shell" region, and also beyond the SCN borders, primarily to the subparaventricular zone (SPZ) of the hypothalamus, a region along the third ventricle lying just caudal and dorsal of the SCN ( The molecular feedback loop within individual SCN neurons ultimately has its impact on physiological processes through regulation of SCN neuronal fi ring rate. Rhythmic regulation of potassium channels in the membrane of SCN neurons appears to be critical for producing circadian rhythms in membrane potential and fi ring rate. Large-conductance, calcium-activated potassium channels (BK channels) are rhythmically expressed in the SCN, with high levels of transcript and of BK channel activity during the night, contributing to the reduction in fi ring rate at night Rhythmic fi ring of SCN neurons not only serves as its mechanism of communication with downstream target regions, but also plays an important role in synchronizing the cellular oscillators within the SCN to each other. When sodium-dependent action potentials are blocked for several days, SCN neurons become desynchronized from one another. The mechanism for this may be as simple as the loss of rhythmic, synaptic release of neurotransmitters including VIP. There is some evidence for gap junction-mediated synchronization of SCN neuronal fi ring, but little evidence for gap junction-mediated coordination of circadian phase The rhythmic electrical activity of SCN neurons likely leads to rhythmic neurotransmitter release and modulation of downstream, synaptic targets along defi ned anatomical pathways as discussed in greater detail later. Several lines of evidence indicate that the SCN also infl uences locomotor activity through secretion of humoral output molecules. Among these lines of evidence are the fi ndings that (1) transplants of fetal SCN tissue that restore locomotor activity rhythms do not restore other rhythms, including endocrine rhythms, and (2) transplanted SCN tissue encapsulated so as to allow diffusion of small molecules while preventing axonal outgrowth nevertheless can restore locomotor activity rhythms in SCN-lesioned hamsters For oscillations in the abundance of circadian clock gene products in SCN neurons to affect physiology and behavior, the molecular feedback loop must impact on more overt aspects of cellular rhythmicity. One mechanism for this to occur is through circadian regulation of transcripts encoding ion channels, and indeed, two types of potassium channels have been identifi ed that contribute to circadian rhythmicity. Through regulation of potassium channel levels, rhythmic transcription factor activity is translated into rhythmicity in neuronal fi ring rate and neurotransmitter release. Though much of the output of the SCN comes via synaptic interactions to downstream targets, substances released from the SCN by a humoral mechanism can infl uence locomotor activity.Many drugs, toxins, and stressors have effects that vary over the 24-hour day. Many of these variations represent true circadian rhythms in responses (e.g., they persist in constant environmental conditions). Chronopharmacology is the subdiscipline of chronobiology that seeks to identify and understand these rhythms, and is an important fi eld as altering the time of drug administration can have a profound impact on its effi cacy, toxicity, and the ratio between these two measures (the therapeutic index). For this reason, there is often a specifi c time for optimal response to a chemotherapeutic agent, and this optimal timing varies between agents depending on their mechanism of action. Rhythmicity in drug effects could be due to alterations in bioavailability (absorption, metabolism, or excretion) or in end organ sensitivity. Rhythmic variation in therapeutic index has been well documented for several chemotherapeutic agents and anesthetics. There are also robust rhythms in responses to toxic agents, including infectious agents such as E. coli and endotoxin derived from bacterial cell walls. Recent studies have begun to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying rhythms in detoxifi cation and drug sensitivity, and focus attention on rhythmicity within target cell populations.Gachon, F., Olela, F. F., Animals that lack circadian rhythms (those with destruction of the SCN or genetic disruption of key circadian clock genes) survive and these animals generally can reproduce. Nevertheless, the circadian timing system is thought to optimize "internal temporal order" by coordinating rhythms in different tissues, and to allow anticipation of physiological demands imposed by the predictably changing environment. The impact of the circadian oscillator is exerted through the rhythmicity it imposes on physiological functions (Box 41.3).The following sections will address the regulation of several physiological rhythms. In most cases, we emphasize how these rhythms are "wired" to the SCN through neuroanatomical pathways and emphasize rhythms for which the SCN can be viewed as a driving pacemaker. It is important to note that, to date, there has been relatively little effort to address the role of tissue-autonomous rhythmicity in the neural and peripheral tissues regulated by the SCN. (For important exceptions to this statement, see Considering the pervasive infl uence of the SCN on rhythmic physiology, the direct anatomical output of the SCN is surprisingly limited. SCN efferents project heavily to a column of cells dorsal and caudal of the SCN that includes the subparaventricular zone (SPZ) and the dorsomedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (DMH) The infl uence of the circadian timing system on sleep is mediated by SCN efferents that only indirectly impact upon the brain regions that regulate sleep (see Chapter 42). As noted earlier, a pathway from the SCN via the vSPZ and DMH is necessary for circadian regulation of sleep. In contrast to the sparse connections of the SPZ to sleep-regulatory areas, the DMH is a primary source of input to the ventrolateral preoptic area (VLPO) and to the neurons of the lateral hypothalamus that secrete the neuropeptide, orexin, that are critical for regulation of sleep. The output from the DMH to the VLPO is GABAergic, therefore promoting wakefulness by inhibiting the "sleep switch" neurons. The output from the DMH to the orexin neurons in the lateral hypothalamus contains glutamate and thyrotropin-releasing hormone, and is presumably excitatory, thus promoting wakefulness. The DMH has few direct projections to the brain stem areas that comprise the ascending arousal system, but the orexin neurons have extensive, excitatory projections to these regions . Thus, a multistage pathway from the SCN to sleep regulatory centers allows integration of other inputs (emotional and cognitive inputs as well as the homeostatic drive for sleep) and sharp transitions between states, rather than simple and direct command control of behavioral state. The importance of orexin neurons in coordinating the activity of this system is revealed by narcolepsy, a sleep disorder caused by an apparently autoimmune destruction of the orexin-containing neurons in the lateral hypothalamus, and mimicked in animal models by disruption of orexin or orexin receptors.One relatively small subclass of sleep disorders are the circadian-based sleep disorders. As discussed in Box 41.2, in circadian-based sleep disorders, the problem is with the relative timing of sleep, rather than its initiation or maintenance (as in more classical types of insomnia).The SCN output pathway leading to rhythms in adrenal corticosteroid secretion starts with a projection SCN output to target sites is insuffi cient for rhythmicity. In a similar manner, the dorsal part of the SPZ is a key relay for amplifying output from the SCN to the medial preoptic area that generates the rhythm in core body temperature. Fiber-sparing lesions of the dorsal SPZ selectively disrupt the body temperature rhythm while leaving sleep and activity rhythms intact Another level of amplifi cation and integration occurs in the DMH, which is heavily innervated by the ventral SPZ as well as receiving direct innervation from the SCN Among the most widely recognized roles of the circadian timing system is in the regulation of behavioral state. Our level of alertness is strongly infl uenced by two biological factors, the time spent awake and the circadian time, and also by environmental factors from the SCN to the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN). A subset of neurons in the PVN contain corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH), and project to the external zone of the median eminence. CRH, released into the pituitary portal system, regulates the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior pituitary. ACTH, in turn, is carried in the bloodstream to the adrenal gland, where it stimulates secretion of adrenal steroids. Adrenal steroids feed back to inhibit CRH and ACTH release in a typical neuroendocrine feedback loop. One would expect that a feedback loop of this type has a set point, where a steady state is reached that balances the releasing factor drive to increase secretion with the endproducts inhibiting the releasing factors. This feedback loop is modulated by the circadian timing system, however: the set point for feedback apparently varies over the course of the day, such that higher corticosteroid levels are required to reduce ACTH release at some times of day than at others. As a result, corticosteroid levels vary over the course of the day with a sinusoidal rhythm. Light exposure at night can directly activate the sympathetic innervation of the adrenal gland, leading to increased corticosteroid production The SCN also regulates circadian rhythms in other neuroendocrine activities. In rodents, the timing of ovulation is strictly regulated and occurs early in the active period on the day of behavioral estrus (see de la Twice-daily prolactin surges can be induced in female rats by mating or by vagino-cervical stimulation that mimics mating and induces pseudopregnancy. The prolactin surges are timed by the SCN. These prolactin surges are ultimately regulated by dopamine released from the median eminence. Feedback of prolactin on the hypothalamic dopamine neurons is also important. The anatomical pathway from the SCN to the hypothalamic dopamine neurons has not been described in detail, but VIP neurons in the SCN and oxytocin neurons in the PVN appear to be involved A major class of physiological rhythms is in autonomic function. These pathways originate in the SCN, utilize GABA as a neurotransmitter, and generally project to the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN). Neurons in the PVN (many containing oxytocin) have direct projections to the spinal cord, where they regulate the activity of autonomic preganglionic neurons. Additional pathways include modulation of vagal activity. These pathways regulate autonomic responses leading to circadian variation in blood pressure and heart rate. These pathways also infl uence metabolism through direct innervation of fat pads and the liver, the latter of which regulates the circadian rhythm in plasma glucose levels One very well-characterized pathway affecting an output rhythm through autonomic pathways is the pathway from the SCN to the pineal gland, critical for the rhythmic production of melatonin Several strategies exist to deal with the varying environmental conditions and varying levels of resources that occur over the course of the year. These strategies include seasonal migration to allow highly mobile species to escape challenging conditions (Box 41.4), and seasonal regulation of physiology for those species that remain. FIGURE 41.13 (A) Schematic illustration of the neuroanatomical circuit regulating pineal melatonin secretion. Photic input detected in the retina is relayed to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), and from there to the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN). A subset of PVN neurons projects to the intermediolateral cell column (IML) of the spinal cord. Preganglionic sympathetic cell bodies at thoracic levels 1 and 2 (T1 and T2) project to the superior cervical ganglion (SCG), which innervates the pineal gland. Norepinephrine released from the terminals of SCG neurons is the primary input to the pineal responsible for stimulating melatonin production at night. Light entrains the SCN clock controlling melatonin, but light at night also has an acute inhibitory effect on melatonin synthesis, by disrupting the sympathetic input to the gland. Blood melatonin levels drop within minutes after exposure to light at night. (B) Biosynthesis of melatonin from serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT). The rate-limiting and highly rhythmic step is the regulation of arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT) activity, which modestly depletes the pineal gland of 5-HT at night as it converts 5HT to N-acetyl-serotonin (NAS). Hydroxy-indole-O-methyltransferase (HIOMT) converts NAS to melatonin (N-acetyl, 5-methoxytryptamine). There is no storage mechanism for melatonin; melatonin diffuses from the pineal into the cerebrospinal fl uid and bloodstream as it is produced, making blood melatonin levels a good refl ection of the sympathetic input to the gland.An intriguing function of circadian clocks is their use in time-compensated sun compass orientation, a phenomenon that was fi rst described by Karl von Frisch in foraging honeybees and by Gustav Kramer in migratory birds. Time-compensated sun compass orientation also is used by eastern North American monarch butterfl ies (Danaus plexippus) during their spectacular fall migration. During the fall journey, the butterfl ies use their navigation skills to fl y south from the United States and southern Canada to overwinter in a few restricted sites atop the Transvolcanic Mountains in central Mexico, some having traveled distances approaching 3000 kilometers.The amazing navigational abilities of monarch butterfl ies are part of a genetic program initiated in the migrants, as those that make the trip south are at least two generations removed from the previous generation of migrants. Time-compensated sun compass orientation is believed to be an essential component of navigation required for successful migration. Time compensation is provided by the butterfl y's circadian clock. The clock allows the butterfl ies to continually correct their fl ight direction, relative to changing skylight parameters, to maintain a fi xed fl ight bearing as the sun moves across the sky during the day ( Cell 124, 233-236.A. Monarch butterfl ies use a time-compensated sun compass to orient south during their fall migration. The butterfl y circadian clock allows the butterfl ies to compensate for the movement of the sun. They are thereby able to maintain a constant bearing in the southerly direction over the course of the day. B. Monarch butterfl ies follow the sun without a functioning circadian clock. A broken circadian clock would disrupt the migration south, and the butterfl ies would not be able to travel successfully to their overwintering grounds.Many mammalian species restrict breeding activity to specifi c times of year, resulting in birth of young in the spring and summer months when food is abundant and other conditions are most favorable for their survival. In many mammalian species, seasonal reproduction is accomplished through regulation of pineal melatonin secretion by the circadian timing system. Responses to seasonal changes in day length (so-called "photoperiodic responses") include seasonal reproduction, but also extend to a much wider array of physiological responses including seasonal molting of the coat (usually mediated by alterations in prolactin secretion), thermoregulatory adjustments (daily torpor and hibernation), alterations in metabolism and body weight, and alterations in behavior. These adjustments likely improve the probability of survival through challenging times. Like circadian rhythms, these seasonal responses are driven by a system that anticipates predictable environmental changes and prepares for them in a predictive, rather than reactive, manner.The SCN-controlled circadian rhythm of pineal melatonin production controls photoperiodic responses in mammals. Melatonin is secreted into the bloodstream at night by the pineal gland. The nocturnal duration of melatonin secretion changes in parallel with the length of the night, making the melatonin signal a reliable internal cue encoding season. Removal of the pineal gland prevents seasonal responses to changes in day length, while administration of melatonin in patterns that mimic the profi les occurring at different times of year can predictably drive reproduction and other photoperiodic responses.The actions of melatonin are mediated by specifi c, G-protein coupled receptors. Two receptors subtypes with high affi nity for melatonin have been identifi ed in mammals. The Mel 1a (MT1) receptor subtype is responsible for the majority of melatonin receptor binding found in SCN and elsewhere in brain, while the Mel 1b (MT2) receptor is expressed at considerably lower levels. Several photoperiodic species lack a functional Mel 1b receptor gene, suggesting that the Mel 1a receptor may be key for regulating seasonal responses.The duration of melatonin receptor occupation is "measured" by responsive tissues, such that varying melatonin duration (as occurs over the course of the year) has profound effects on neuroendocrine function. The anatomical sites of melatonin receptor expression and melatonin action vary by species. In many species, Mel 1a melatonin receptors in the pars tuberalis of the pituitary contribute to the regulation of prolactin secretion from the anterior pituitary. Melatonin receptors in the mediobasal hypothalamus contribute to gonadotropic responses important for the seasonal regulation of reproduction.The proximate output of the SCN is a rhythm of neuronal fi ring, which results in rhythmic synaptic and perhaps humoral activation of additional brain regions. The major target site for SCN axons is a region dorsal and caudal of the SCN, including the subparaventricular zone (SPZ) and extending into the dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus (DMH). This extensive projection appears to amplify SCN neuronal output and provides a mechanism for the SCN to infl uence a wide variety of downstream targets in a manner that can be site-specifi c. The anatomical pathways leading to specifi c behavioral and physiological rhythms have been defi ned to varying extents. Already within the subparaventricular zone, there is divergence of the output pathway controlling rhythms in sleep/wake and locomotor activity (which requires the ventral SPZ) from the pathway regulating body temperature (which requires the dorsal SPZ).One of the most extensively studied outputs is the pathway from the SCN, via the PVN and the sympathetic nervous system, to the pineal, regulating melatonin production. The circadian regulation of melatonin secretory duration regulates reproduction and other photoperiodic responses in seasonally breeding species. The regulation of photoperiodic responses is the most obviously adaptive role for circadian rhythmicity in mammals.Behavioral and physiological rhythmicity is widespread throughout the animal kingdom. A capacity for cell-autonomous rhythmicity exists in many cell types. Circadian rhythmicity in vertebrates and fl ies is based on an intracellular molecular feedback loop. Many mechanistic details of this molecular feedback loop have been elucidated in the past 10 years. There is frequently redundancy of function between closely related genes in mammals. The SCN serve as the coordinating pacemaker in the mammalian circadian timing system. In the absence of the SCN, rhythms in other tissues generally degrade because the synchronization between oscillators is lost. The SCN clock is entrained primarily by light. Lighting information is detected by a specifi c luminance-coding retinal system that involves intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells, that also serve as a conduit for information originating in rod and cone photoreceptors. SCN axonal output is focused dorsocaudally to the subparaventricular zone, and then diverges along specifi c ana-tomical pathways to control a diverse array of rhythmic functions. Among the most physiologically important output rhythms in mammals is the regulation of pineal melatonin, as this hormone is key to regulating photoperiodic adjustments in response to changing day length. Other circadian outputs are of less obvious survival value, but an increasing understanding of the importance of the circadian infl uence on sleep/wake, metabolism, cardiovascular and neuroendocrine function, and resistance to toxicological challenges indicates that the circadian system dictates an "internal temporal order" that improves physiological and mental performance.Sleep is a behavioral state that alternates with waking. It is characterized by a recumbent posture, a raised threshold to sensory stimulation, a low level of motor output, and a unique behavior-dreaming. The complex neurobiology of these behavioral features of sleep has been explored at the systemic, cellular, and molecular levels since the mid-1960s. Although these studies have provided substantial insight into the physiology and pathology of sleep, only recently have we begun to obtain defi nitive answers to the adaptive signifi cance of sleep, the behavioral state that takes up one-third of our lives.In contrast to sleep, the conscious behavior of waking is characterized by an active and deliberate sensorimotor discourse with the environment. For maintenance of waking behavior, neural gates must remain open for sensory input and motor output, the brain must be tuned and activated, and the chemical microclimate must be appropriate for processing and recording of information. Wakefulness is accompanied by conscious experience that reaches its highest level of complexity in adult humans. Waking behavior includes a number of cognitive aspects, such as sensation, perception, attention, memory, instinct, emotion, volition, cognition, and language, that make up our awareness of the world and self and form the basis of an adaptive interaction with our environment. This chapter focuses on the mechanisms of behavioral state control that make such interactions possible, with an emphasis on sleep as a component of adaptive behavior.The behavioral signs of sleep vary regularly during every period of sleep; posture, arousal, threshold, and motor output change in a stereotyped, cyclic manner. Although these changes can be observed directly, their study is facilitated by placing electrodes on the scalp to measure the electrical activity of the brain. From these electroencephalograms (EEGs) At the onset of sleep, the brain begins to deactivate, and awareness of the outside world is lost. A welldescribed sequence of thalamocortical events causes the progressive slowing of brain waves, seen on EEG during this phase of NREM sleep. The threshold for arousal rises in proportion to the degree of EEG slowing, and at the greatest depth of sleep, awakenings are often diffi cult, incomplete, and brief. This sleep state is designated the slow wave or delta phase of NREM sleep. People have little or no recall of conscious experience in deep NREM sleep. Many autonomic and regulatory functions, such as heart rate, blood pressure, and respiration rate, diminish in NREM sleep, but some neuroendocrine activity increases. The pulsatile release of growth hormone and sexual maturation hormones from the pituitary is maximal during sleep, with over 95% of the daily output occurring in NREM sleep.At regular intervals during sleep, the brain reactivates into a state characterized by fast, low-voltage activity in the EEG, along with muscle atonia and rapid eye movements. This sleep state, termed rapid eye movement sleep because of prominent eye movements, differs from waking in several ways, but most notably by an inhibition of sensory input and motor output. Postural shifts precede and follow REM sleep; eye movements, intermittent small muscle twitching, and penile erection occur during REM sleep. The presence (or absence) of REM sleep erection is used clinically to distinguish between psychological and physiological male impotence. In REM sleep, many autonomic functions change; the fi ne control of temperature and cardiopulmonary function is lost.People aroused from NREM sleep, especially early in the night, are confused, have diffi culty reporting conscious experience, and return to sleep rapidly. Subjects aroused from REM sleep, especially during periods with frequent eye movements, often give detailed reports of dreams characterized by vivid hallucinations, bizarre thinking, and intense emotion.Although dreaming also occurs during NREM sleep, it is much more strongly associated with the activated brain of REM sleep.REM and NREM sleep states alternate, with a cycle of about 90 min in adult humans. NREM phases are deeper and longer early in the night As a quiescent and ecologically protected behavior, sleep fosters conservation of energy, defense from predation, and an opportunity for repair of injury. The anabolic character of NREM sleep (e.g., brain and body inactivity and hormone release) suggests a rest and restoration function. In contrast, the high proportion of REM sleep in the developing brain, the high level  Philosophical speculation about the nature of sleep and conscious behavior is as old as recorded history, and many philosophers, including the Ionian Greeks, anticipated the physicalistic models that only recently have been articulated in modern neuroscience (for details of the following historical material, refer to The state-dependent nature of the EEG helped Berger convince his skeptical critics that the rhythmic oscillations he recorded across the human scalp with his galvanometer originated in the brain and were not artifacts of movement or of scalp muscle activity. When his subjects relaxed, closed their eyes, or dozed off, the low-voltage brain waves associated with alertness gave way to higher voltage, lower frequency patterns Following Berger's discovery, a fl urry of descriptive and experimental studies aimed at understanding the EEG itself, the full range of its state-dependent variability, and the control of that variability by the brain, were performed. Loomis and Harvey were the fi rst to describe the tendency of the EEG to show systematic changes in activity as subjects fell asleep at night (tracings 3-5 of Because other mammals shared these correlations between arousal level and EEG, the Belgian physiologist Frederick Bremer made experimental transections of the mammalian brain to determine the nature and source of EEG activation (the low-voltage, fast pattern of waking) and deactivation (the high-voltage, slow pattern of sleep). Thinking the activity level probably depended on sensory input, Bremer transected the brain of the cat at the level of the fi rst cervical spinal cord segment, producing a condition called encephale isole. He was surprised to fi nd that the isolated forebrain was activated and alert despite this transection of a major portion of its sensory input. When he then transected the midbrain at the intercollicular level, creating the cerveau isole condition, he observed a sleep-like state with persistent EEG slowing and unresponsiveness. Bremer incorrectly inferred that removal of the trigeminal nerve afferents (which entered the brain stem between the level of the two cuts) accounted for the sleep-like state of the cerveau isole.That sleep might be an active brain process-and not simply the absence of waking as Bremer sup-   posed-was fi rst experimentally suggested by the work of the Swiss Nobel laureate W. R. Hess. Hess was involved in a broad program investigating the effects of electrical stimulation of the subcortical regions mediating autonomic control (especially the hypothalamus). He discovered that by stimulating the thalamocortical system at the frequencies of intrinsic EEG spindles (short series of waves) and slow waves, he could induce the behavioral and electrographic signs of sleeping in unanesthetized cats. This discovery opened the door to the idea that sleep and waking might be active processes, each with its own specifi c cellular and metabolic mechanisms and functional consequences. This paradigm has since born abundant scientifi c fruit. For example, the precise details of spindle and slow wave elaboration have been worked out Now that we accept the idea that the spontaneous activity of neurons determines the substages of sleep, it is diffi cult for us to appreciate the strength and persistence of its predecessor, the refl ex concept of sleep. Scientifi c giants such as Ivan Pavlov and Charles Sherrington were so inspired by the refl ex doctrine that they were convinced that brain activity simply ceased in the absence of sensory input (Box 42.1).In 1953, Eugene Aserinsky and Nathaniel Kleitman, working in Chicago, discovered that the brain-mind did indeed self-activate during sleep. They observed regularly timed, spontaneous desynchronization of the EEG, accompanied by clusters of rapid, saccadic eye movements and acute accelerations of heart and respiration rates (see In adult humans, the intrinsic cycle of inactivation (NREM sleep) and activation (REM sleep) recurs with a period length of 90-100 min ( The paradoxical preservation of sleep in the face of dreaming in REM sleep began to be explained when Francois Michel and Michel Jouvet, working in Lyon in 1959, demonstrated that inhibition of muscle activity was a component of REM sleep in cats. Using transection, lesion, and stimulation techniques, the Jouvet team also discovered that the control system for REM sleep was located in the pontine brain stem. The pons is the source of EEG activation and REMs. Muscle inhibition is also mediated by pontine signals, but these are relayed via the inhibitory bulbar reticular formation to the spinal cord. Synchronous with each fl urry of REMs, periodic activation signals, or pontogeniculo-occipital (PGO) waves, are sent from the pons up to the forebrain (and down to the spinal cord). The PGO waves trigger bursts of fi ring by geniculate and cortical neurons which, during waking, process sensory inputs and motor outputs, whereas other signals originating in the brain stem damp sensory input (via presynaptic inhibition) and motor output (via postsynaptic inhibition) Before the discovery of the neuromodulatory systems of the brain by the Swedish team led by Kjell Fuxe in the early 1960s, scientists who studied sleep could not understand that the brain could control its own state and that the stages of sleep were actively generated. Thus such neurobiological giants as Charles Sherrington were convinced that because sleep occurred when environmental stimulus levels were low (which is normally true), it also occurred because stimulus levels were low (which is false). In light of the discovery of the reticular activating system by Giuseppe Thus, in REM sleep the brain-mind is effectively offl ine with respect to external inputs and outputs and receives internally generated signals. Sensory input is also blocked during NREM sleep, but neither PGO waves nor the active inhibition of motor output is seen outside of REM sleep. The cellular and molecular bases of these dramatic changes in input-output gating have been detailed using Sherrington's refl ex paradigm together with extracellular and intracellular recording techniques These studies indicated that in normal REM sleep, motor inhibition prevents the motor commands of the generators of instinctual behavior patterns from being acted out. As a result, during REM these patterns are unexpressed in the outside world but occur in a fi ctive manner within the internal world of the brain-mind. One strong signifi cance of these fi ndings for a theory of dream consciousness lies in their ability to explain the ubiquity of imagined movement in dreams .The scientifi c history of sleep began with the application of electroencephalography in 1928, demonstrating that the electrical activity of the brain changed but did not cease during sleep. Subsequent refi nements revealed the necessary role of the reticular formation for cortical arousal during sleep and the association of this arousal with desynchronized cortical activity. In addition, emulating the oscillatory EEG spindles of thalamic projections to cortex allowed sleep to be induced by direct thalamic electrical stimulation in experimental animals. Sleep studies in the 1950s showed REM sleep to be a "paradoxical" state in which sleep was at its deepest, yet accompanied by rapid eye movements and sympathetic signs of arousal, interpreted as dreaming, and accompanied by still further reductions of postural muscle tone. During REM sleep, pontine waves of activity arise with each fl urry of eye movements, during which motor activity is deeply depressed.Moruzzi and Magoun's original concept of a nonspecifi c reticular activating system has been elaborated and greatly modifi ed by subsequent anatomical and physiological studies. Two general principles have emerged. One is that most of the classic reticular core neurons have very specifi c afferent inputs and highly organized outputs. The other is that the reticular formation contains small groups of neurons that send widely branching axons to distant parts of the brain, where their neurotransmitters modulate brain function.The input-output characteristics of each of the reticular formation's multiple subsystems refl ect specifi c sensorimotor function, modulatory function, or both. For example, many neurons of the reticular formation are involved in the integration of eye, head, and trunk positions as these change to accommodate specifi c behavioral challenges and tasks. These reticular neurons receive inputs from skin, muscle, bone, and joint receptors in the periphery, which they integrate and link to the vestibular and cerebellar circuits that determine posture and movement. This information must also be integrated by higher brain structures in the visual, somatosensory, and motor systems to develop the complex motor patterns of adaptive behavior.Several chemically specifi ed neuronal groups also lie in the reticular formation. They have patterns of connections that differ from those of the previously discussed neurons of the reticular formation. The groups of NE neurons (designated A1-A7 by The major NE cell group is the locus coeruleus (A4 and A6). This compact cell group is located in the rostral pontine reticular formation and central gray matter. The neurons of the locus coeruleus project widely but in a highly specifi c pattern. One group of locus coeruleus neurons appears to project largely caudally to sensory regions of the brain stem and spinal cord. Other neurons of the locus coeruleus project widely to the cerebellar cortex, dorsal thalamus, and cerebral cortex Two additional subsets of chemically identifi ed neurons appear critically involved in behavioral state regulation. The fi rst subset to be discovered contained the 5-HT neurons of the brain stem raphé The other important set of reticular formation nuclei involved in behavioral state control produces acetylcholine (ACh) as its neurotransmitter. ACh was well known as the transmitter of motor neurons, but early work indicated that ACh is found in nonmotor brain areas. Two sets of cholinergic neurons are involved in control of the behavioral state. The fi rst set is two pontine nuclei: the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus and the pedunculopontine nucleus. Cholinergic neurons in these nuclei project to the brain stem reticular formation, hypothalamus, thalamus, and basal forebrain. The projection to the forebrain involves the second set of cholinergic neurons, those in the medial septum, the nucleus of the diagonal band, and the substantia innominata-nucleus basalis complex. This set projects to limbic forebrain, including the hippocampus, and to the neocortex.In contrast to the modulatory neurons, which are characterized by their production of norepinephrine, 5-HT, and ACh, neurons in reticular formation nuclei that are involved in sensorimotor integration typically produce either the excitatory transmitter glutamate or the inhibitory transmitter GABA.Sensorimotor and modulatory neurons of the reticular formation differ markedly in their fi ring properties. Sensorimotor neurons, approximately 50 to 75 mm in diameter, can fi re continuously at high rates of up to 50 Hz and can generate bursts of up to 500 Hz. Their larger axons, especially those projecting to the spinal cord, have conduction velocities in excess of 100 m/s Modulatory neurons are smaller (10-25 mm in diameter) than sensorimotor neurons, and even those with long axons conduct their signals very slowly (1 m/s). They fi re wider spikes (2 ms in duration) at much slower tonic frequencies (1-10 Hz) than sensorimotor neurons. In addition, they often show a very regular, metronome-like fi ring pattern, a refl ection of the pacemaker properties they share with the Purkinje cells of the heart. As their leaky membranes spontaneously and slowly depolarize, they reach threshold, fi re, and then self-inhibit, becoming refractory even to exogenous excitatory inputs. Modulatory neurons are much less likely than sensorimotor neurons to fi re in clusters or bursts unless powerfully excited; even then, they adapt rapidly. Thus, modulatory neurons are well suited to detect novel input. Because of their vast postsynaptic domain, they can also help set behavioral and mental states.The contrasting features of sensorimotor and modulatory neurons confer functionally important distinctions on their neuronal populations. The high rate of discharge of the sensorimotor neurons, acting through extensive interconnections that tie together sensorimotor neurons, causes exponential recruitment. This amplifi cation occurs in response to novel stimuli requiring analysis and directed action (in the wake state) and in the generation of REM sleep, a state of sustained activation (when the system is offl ine with respect to its inputs and outputs).In contrast, the feedback inhibition and pacemaker potentials of modulatory neurons allow the production of highly synchronized output during waking and sleeping. These features also somehow cause an exponential decline in the fi ring rate of these neurons during REM sleep, until fi ring stops. Studies suggest that this REM sleep inhibition may involve a GABAergic action that arises in the hypothalamus at sleep onset and spreads through the brain stem as NREM sleep progresses to REM Later, Waking is a complex state. Its fundamental features are the maintenance of sensory input from multiple receptors, the capacity for directing attention and accessing memory, the constant readjustments of posture, the maintenance of forebrain activation, and an array of motor output. It is worth noting here, however, that reticular formation plays a crucial role in the initiation and maintenance of both wakefulness and sleep. We now focus on the active control of sleep.The onset of sleep occurs when the combined S and C factors near their peak and the environmental milieu is conducive to sleep. At this point, the brain stem and cortical mechanisms of waking are relaxed: vigilance lapses, muscle tone declines, eyelids close, and the EEG slows. Because the cortex is still active, removal of ascending infl uences often results in sudden unresponsiveness, which may be associated with dreamlike imagery. This sleep onset mentation usually is abolished quickly by the thalamocortical oscillation of deeper NREM sleep. As NREM sleep begins, the incomplete relaxation of the mechanisms maintaining muscle tone may result in paroxysmal twitching, a form of myoclonus often affecting the legs.Clinical and experimental fi ndings have shown that lesions to anterior portions of the hypothalamus cause insomnia, and stimulation of this area promotes sleep, whereas lesions of the posterior hypothalamus cause hypersomnolence and neurons in this region decrease fi ring during sleep The two-process model of sleep propensity suggests that homeostatic mechanisms (Process S) interact with circadian factors (Process C) to regulate behaviorally expressed sleep and waking Details of the molecular biological and cellular basis of Process C are in Chapter 41 Reciprocally interconnected thalamic and cortical neurons form the circuits that are the physiological basis of the NREM oscillations including delta and slow (<1 Hz) oscillatory rhythms and the spindle and K-complex wave forms ( Intrinsic oscillations of NREM represent the combined infl uence of two neuronal mechanisms: (1) inhibitory infl uence by neurons of the thalamic reticular nucleus-a thin sheet of GABAergic neurons surrounding the thalamic periphery-on thalamic neurons projecting to the cortex; and (2) an oscillation within cortical neurons involving alternation between a prolonged hyperpolarization phase and a shorter, rapidly spiking, depolarized phase Delta frequency EEG oscillations may have both thalamic and cortico-thalamic origins In the transition from NREM to REM, activation of the thalamus by brain stem cholinergic neurons blocks the intrinsic oscillations resulting in a cortical "desynchronization." This appears as a speeding and diversifi cation of EEG frequencies along with a decrease in the amplitude of oscillations in the EEG (Steriade, (left). The network is represented as comprising 3 neuronal systems (center) that mediate REM sleep electrographic phenomena (right). Postulated inhibitory connections are shown as red circles; postulated excitatory connections as green circles; and cholinergic pontine nuclei are shown as blue circles. It should be noted that the actual synaptic signs of many of the aminergic and reticular pathways remain to be demonstrated and, in many cases, the neuronal architecture is known to be far more complex than indicated here (e.g., the thalamus and cortex). During REM, additive facilitatory effects on pontine REM-on cells are postulated to occur via disinhibition (resulting from the marked reduction in fi ring rate by aminergic neurons at REM sleep onset) and through excitation (resulting from mutually excitatory cholinergic-noncholinergic cell interactions within the pontine tegmentum). The net result is strong tonic and phasic activation of reticular and sensorimotor neurons in REM sleep. REM sleep phenomena are postulated to be mediated as follows: EEG desynchronization results from a net tonic increase in reticular, thalamocortical, and cortical neuronal fi ring rates. PGO waves are the result of tonic disinhibition and phasic excitation of burst cells in the lateral pontomesencephalic tegmentum. Rapid eye movements are the consequence of phasic fi ring by reticular and vestibular cells; the latter (not shown) excite oculomotor neurons directly. Muscular atonia is the consequence of tonic postsynaptic inhibition of spinal anterior horn cells by the pontomedullary reticular formation. Muscle twitches occur when excitation by reticular and pyramidal tract motorneurons phasically overcomes the tonic inhibition of the anterior horn cells. RN, raphé nuclei; LC, locus coeruleus; P, peribrachial region; PPT, pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus; LDT, laterodorsal tegmental nucleus; mPRF, meso-and mediopontine tegmentum (e.g., gigantocellular tegmental fi eld, parvocellular tegmental fi eld); RAS, midbrain reticular activating system; BIRF, bulbospinal inhibitory reticular formation (e.g., gigantocellular tegmental fi eld, parvocellular tegmental fi eld, magnocellular tegmental fi eld); TC, thalamocortical; CT, cortical; PT cell, pyramidal cell; III, oculomotor; IV, trochlear; V, trigmenial motor nuclei; AHC, anterior horn cell. From . . Cholinergic desynchronization of EEG in REM and waking occurs via (1) an inhibitory effect on GABAergic thalamic reticular neurons that disinhibits their thalamo-cortical targets, and (2) by cholinergic excitatory infl uence on thalamo-cortical neurons that facilitates their glutamatergic excitation of the cortex The cellular and molecular events that produce the regular alternation of REM and NREM sleep emerge under brain stem control once sleep has been achieved • EEG desynchronization • Phasic potentials recorded sequentially in the pons, thalamic lateral geniculate body and the occipital cortex of the cat, termed pontogeniculo-occipital (PGO) waves or P-waves in the rat The aminergic and cholinergic neurons described in the RI hypothesis are components of the brain stem ARAS, a system that also includes large and varied populations of glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons The RI hypothesis is supported by extensive experimental and clinical fi ndings showing powerful effects of Ach and the monoamines NE and 5-HT on the REM-NREM oscillator. For example, in many regions of the pontine reticular activating system of cats, microinjection of either drugs like carbachol that mimic the action of acetylcholine (cholinergic agonists) or drugs like neostigmine that block the enzymatic degradation of naturally produced acetylcholine (acetylcholinesterase inhibitors) produces a state indistinguishable from naturally occurring REM sleep Major roles for acetylcholine and the monoamines in REM-NREM control continue to be reported (reviewed in Other models on the control of REM onset and offset have emphasized interactions between brain  . Only those areas that could be matched easily between two or more studies are illustrated here and a realistic morphology of the depicted areas is not implied. Note that considerably more extensive areas of activation and deactivation are reported in the individual studies; these more detailed fi ndings are reviewed in . The depicted areas are thus viewed most realistically as representative portions of larger CNS areas subserving similar functions (e.g., limbic-related cortex, ascending activation pathways, and multimodal association cortex). stem GABAergic cell populations in which GABAergic inhibition plays both REM facilitory and REM inhibitory roles. For example, Despite the prominence of cholinergic, aminergic, and amino acid (GABAergic and glutamatergic) neuronal populations in the control of the sleep-wake and REM-NREM cycles, many additional neurotransmit-ter systems participate in the modulation sleep states. Such neurochemicals may exert their effects on behavioral state by interacting with aminergic, cholinergic, and amino acid neurons that exert a more direct "executive" control on sleep and waking states. In addition, such neurochemicals may have roles in mediating specifi c physiological signs of REM and NREM sleep.In addition to the prominent roles of norepinephrine, serotonin, and histamine, recent fi ndings have begun to identify roles for a fourth monoamine, dopamine, in sleep wake regulation. Until just recently, little attention was paid to potential roles of dopamine in sleep-wake control because, unlike the other monoamines, fi ring rate of dopaminergic cells in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and ventral tegmental area (VTA) did not appear to vary with behavioral state (see . However, Histaminergic projections of the TMN diffusely innervate the entire forebrain and brain stem The brain's most ubiquitous inhibitory neurotransmitter, GABA, is involved at many stages in the control of the sleep-wake and the REM-NREM cycle NO has recently been widely implicated in sleep cycle modulation and functions primarily as an intercellular messenger, which can enhance the synaptic release of neurotransmitters such as ACh and enhance capillary vasodilation Neuropeptides are increasingly seen to play diverse roles in regulation of the sleep-wake and REM-NREM cycles. As described earlier, the hypothalamic peptide galanin participates in the inhibition of wakepromoting centers during sleep onset, the hypothalamic peptide orexin promotes waking As in other areas of neuroscience, research on behavioral state control is now beginning to extend its inquiry beyond the neurotransmitter and its receptors to the roles of intracellular second messengers and gene transcription. For example, Circadian and homeostatic factors together regulate sleep-wake propensity. Circadian information is provided by reliable molecular clocks in cells of the SCN of the anterior hypothalamus. SCN neurons transmit circadian information via several hypothalamic nuclei to sites where its infl uence is combined with information on homeostatic sleep pressure indexed by endogenous somnogenic substances such as adenosine that accumulate during waking.A key structure in the initiation of NREM sleep is the VLPO in the anterior hypothalamus whose inhibitory GABA and galaninergic neurons inhibit wakepromoting arousal systems originating in cholinergic, noradrenergic, serotonergic, and dopaminergic brain stem nuclei, the histaminergic TMN in the posterior hypothalamus, and cholinergic arousal systems of the basal forebrain and brain stem. During waking, the peptide neuromodulator orexin from cells in the lateral hypothalamus further excites these aminergic and cholinergic arousal systems and stabilizes the waking pole of a bistable sleep-wake mechanism analogous to an electrical fl ip-fl op circuit.The ascending arousal systems of waking and REM suppress the endogenous oscillatory rhythms generated in thalamo-cortical circuits that manifest as the slow oscillation, spindle, and delta brain waves of the EEG in NREM sleep. The slow oscillatory rhythm is generated by cortical neurons and refl ects a pattern of prolonged hyperpolarization followed by burst fi ring that controls the timing of spindles, delta waves, and K-complexes in the NREM sleep EEG.Aminergic, cholinergic, and orexinergic neuromodulation promotes the activated brain states of waking but cholinergic and perhaps dopaminergic arousal systems promote the activated state of REM sleep. After sleep is initiated, an ultradian oscillator located near the junction of the pons and midbrain controls the regular alternation of NREM and REM sleep stages. This alternation of states involves a reciprocal interaction between aminergic REM-on and cholinergic REMoff cell groups, the interactions of which are mediated by interposed excitatory, inhibitory, and autoregulatory circuits that utilize the amino acid neurotransmitters GABA and glutamate. Substantial species differences may exist in mechanisms of REM-NREM control and mutually inhibitory GABAergic circuits may exert the most proximal control of sleep state alternation in rodents.Additional neurochemicals such as the amino acid glycine and neuropeptide hormones contribute to the regulation of sleep-wake and REM-NREM cycles as well as to specifi c physiological signs of particular behavioral states. Contemporary neurophysiological research is elucidating the intracellular events taking place in second messenger systems and the cell nucleus. Emerging details on the molecular expression of specifi c sleep-related genes will undoubtedly provide an increasingly detailed understanding of causal mechanisms underlying the control of behavioral state.Two linked models-one neurobiological  and the other psychophysiological The subjective experience of waking, NREM sleep, and REM sleep can tentatively be linked to the accompanying changes in physiology In the early days of the EEG, brain waves with frequencies greater than 25 Hz were either ignored or fi ltered out because of the problem of interference by 50-or 60-Hz artifacts from electrical power sources. Later, researchers were able to focus on the possibility that 40-Hz EEG activity synchronizes processing in cortical areas.Rodolfo Llinás proposed that as the cortex is scanned by the thalamus, 40-Hz waves propagate from the frontal to the occipital poles Functional neuroimaging studies have revealed distinctive differences in regional brain activation between the cardinal behavioral states of waking, NREM sleep and REM sleep (for a review and original citations, see . In brief, widespread deactivation of the forebrain and brain stem is seen following sleep onset, and activation further decreases with the increasing depth of NREM sleep from NREM stage 1 to 2 to slow-wave sleep (SWS). Subsequently in REM sleep, however, there is selective reactivation to waking or above-waking levels in brain stem, diencephalic, subcortical limbic, cortico-limbic, and selected cortical association areas. Notably however, during REM, signifi cant deactivation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex relative to waking persists. These fi ndings have led to an updating of the original activation synthesis hypothesis of dreaming Complementing these fi ndings have been neuropsychological fi ndings on brain-damaged patients by  Alterations in cognitive and vegetative functions are linked to changes in central modulatory systems during sleep. For example, active hypothalamic temperature control is diminished or abandoned in REM sleep Compared to waking, deep NREM sleep shows a rather global deactivation pattern in keeping with the observed EEG slowing and synchronization. However, in REM, some areas are hyperactivated (among which the pontine brain stem, the limbic system, and the paralimbic cortex are most notable), whereas others are deactivated (among which the posterior cingulate and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex are most notable).These shifts in regional blood fl ow, and by inference regional neuronal activity, map nicely onto the observed changes in consciousness. Thus activation of the amygdala and other sub-cortical and cortical limbic structures is relevant to the domination of dream consciousness by emotion, the selective activation of only certain of the multimodal cortices is relevant to the hyper-associative quality of dreaming, whereas the inactivation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex seems relevant to the defects in cognition and memory. At last, the human brain and its wondrous array of conscious states is amenable to neurobiological analysis, in real time, in real people, and in patients as well as in healthy individuals.  control of autonomic function. Our understanding of changes in the control of vegetative and sensorimotor functions during waking and sleep can be applied to understand sleep-related dysfunctions such as insomnia (inability to sleep), hypersomnia (excessive sleepiness), and parasomnia (sleep with refl ex responses to stimuli) When central nervous system (CNS) aminergic activity increases, the brain is shifted in the direction of hyperarousal, and stress and insomnia can result. If stress and insomnia are prolonged, the chronic sympathetic overdrive can harm cardiovascular, cognitive, and behavioral functions of an animal. Behavioral and pharmacologic interventions that decrease sympathetic output can be used to reduce this hyperarousal, allowing the restoration of more normal sleep. But pharmacologic interventions invariably additionally modify the structure of sleep itself, reducing its quality. (For reviews of sleep disorders discussed later, see The decrease in CNS aminergic activity (as in depression or narcolepsy) has opposite effects on cardiovascular, cognitive, and behavioral systems. As sleepiness appears, attention and cognition decline, and motor activity is impaired. Under these conditions, the cholinergic system is disinhibited, and the REM generator is triggered abnormally easily. The result is unwanted sleepiness or frank REM sleep attacks. These symptoms are decreased by aminergic agonists, such as blockers of amine reuptake, and psychostimulants, both of which boost sympathetic activity. Notably, many such drugs have both proaminergic and anticholinergic actions.One of the more dramatic problems associated with sleep is an exaggeration, at sleep onset, of the normal decline in respiratory drive (Chapter 37). Also, respiratory irregularity may be provoked by the altered brain stem activity of REM sleep. This sleep-dependent disruption of respiratory function, known as central sleep apnea, involves a decrease in respiratory drive during sleep People with sleep apnea usually feel excessively sleepy during daytime because frequent arousal prevents deep, sustained sleep. They are often unaware of their sleep-dependent breathing pattern because they are never fully aroused from sleep. Instead, observant friends or family often describe seeing these signs of respiratory dysfunction. In a sleep laboratory, EEG, respiratory effort, and cardiovascular parameters (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation) are measured to quantify the problem. Sleep apnea can be treated by having the person wear a mask through which air is forced gently, helping to keep the airways open. The pressure of the air fl uctuates to allow regular exhalation. People with sleep apnea are treated not only to alleviate their constant drowsiness, but to prevent long-term effects of sleep apnea, such as cardiopulmonary complications.Parasomnias that affect the skeletal motor system can occur in either REM or NREM sleep. In NREM sleep these parasomnias (e.g., sleep walking, sleep talking, tooth grinding, and night terrors) are seen mainly in young people, and refl ect motor responses to the outputs of central motor pattern generators. Normally, responses to these generators are disinhibited at sleep onset and inhibited during REM sleep, when no motor commands normally are enacted. Extensive motor output in REM sleep requires the overpowering of the normal muscle atonia of REM sleep, and REM sleep behavior disorder can be a sign of degenerative brain disease in the elderly. Because of a failure to inhibit the expression of motor acts in REM, people with this disorder may literally enact their dream scenarios in their bedrooms. Given the normal lack of this active motor suppression during NREM sleep, it remains a mystery why dreams arising during NREM sleep fail to produce robust motor output.A syndrome strikingly similar to REM sleep behavior disorder can be induced experimentally by bilateral lesions of the pontine tegmentum in cats. When in REM sleep, these animals perform stereotyped behavior sequences, such as hissing, piloerection, pouncing, and jumping. Jouvet called these "hallucinatory behaviors," and Morrison called the phenomenon "REM sleep without atonia" Two models attempt to explain sleep and wakefulness. In the neurobiological model, sleep and waking are the result of a hypothalamic sleep-wake switch followed by reciprocal, phasic interactions between aminergic and cholinergic neurons and related circuitry. In the psychophysiological model, the infl uences of external and internal sensations are emphasized. During slow-wave sleep, thalamocortical synchronous activity diminishes responsiveness to the external world. During REM sleep, under the infl uence of cholinergic projections to the forebrain, internal representations of visual information predominate. In addition to changes in levels of sensory arousal and cognitive performance during sleeping, vegetative functions such as circadian rhythm recognition, body temperature, and autonomic activity also are regulated coordinately. Disorders of sleep infl uence emotional and cognitive functions adversely. Prolonged sleep deprivation is lethal, ending in a septic state of immunodefi ciency, strongly suggesting that sleep serves important but uncertainly mediated maintenance functions. The brain undergoes daily, complex, systematic changes in state that profoundly alter the nature of our consciousness, behavior, autonomic control, and physiologic homeostasis. At the root of these changes is the circadian clock. Located in the hypothalamus, this clock programs rest-activity and body temperature cycles. It also gates the NREM-REM sleep cycle control system in the pons.Some cellular and molecular details of the brain stem diencephalic behavioral state control system are clear: For the awake state, the noradrenergic locus coeruleus and the serotonergic raphé neurons of the pons, histaminergic and orexinergic neurons of the hypothalamus and, possibly, midbrain dopaminergic neurons must fi re regularly to support alertness, attentiveness, memory, orientation, logical thought, and emotional stability. When the output of these chemical systems diminishes, drowsiness occurs. When sleep begins, the output of these systems declines further, and the brain-mind enters NREM sleep, a phase of lowered consciousness which, at times, might lapse into true unconsciousness. As NREM sleep continues, cholinergic activity increases gradually. At the NREM-REM transition, the activity of the serotonergic and nonadrenergic systems is at its nadir, and the output of the cholinergic system is increasing exponentially. This chemical switch results in the cholinergic activation and autostimulation of REM sleep. Combined with the lack of aminergic stimulation, this cholinergic overdrive contributes to the characteristic hallucination, delusion, disorientation, memory loss, and emotional intensity of REM sleep dreaming. What replaces these infl uences during NREM dreaming remains unknown.Although the details of these daily changes in brain chemistry remain to be specifi ed, consequences of their dysfunction are becoming more clearly understood through the study of insomnias, hypersomnias, and parasomnias. Integration of data from basic neurobiology, cognitive psychology, and clinical science enables the construction of specifi c, testable models of how waking and sleep affect our conscious experience. These models, in turn, constitute the building blocks of a scientifi c theory of consciousness.Although it is easy to conceptualize the function of waking and to understand the adaptive value of consciousness, it has been diffi cult to move beyond the subjectively compelling but scientifi cally unsatisfactory notion of sleep as rest. But recent evidence indicates that sleep plays important roles in many physiological and cognitive systems. Evidence strongly suggests that sleep has an anabolic and actively conservative function that is related to the complexity of the mammalian brain The most dramatic evidence of this homeostatic function comes from sleep deprivation studies in rats in which sleep deprivation was fatal when it persisted for four to six weeks. Early in the deprivation period, Since the brain is continuously active across states of sleep, so is the mind. Every modality of conscious experience can be shown to be state dependent, and particularly strong contrasts are evident between waking and dreaming, the two conscious states associated with higher levels of brain activation.These alterations in consciousness are particularly informative to neurologists and psychiatrists because they provide new ways of thinking about the brain basis of mental illness. When brain activation declines in NREM sleep, most aspects of waking consciousness also decline. But when the brain is activated again during REM sleep, it does not reinstate waking consciousness. Instead, consciousness changes in an almost qualitative manner: Perception, instead of being shaped by external forms, becomes hallucinatory. Cognition is similarly deranged. Instead of being oriented, the dreaming mind loses track of time place and person. Instead of thinking actively and critically, the dreaming mind indulges in nonsequiturs, ad-hoc explanations, and other illogical whims. Memory, during dreams, instead of being declaratively faithful to recent history, is fragmented in its disconnection from current events and globally defi cient in recalling them. Emotion, instead of being restrained and focused in response to percepts and thoughts, comes to dominate and organize dreaming consciousness often in strikingly salient ways. All these features of dream consciousness are normal and all are closely related to the changes in brain modulation. Because they are formally similar to the symptoms of the major psychoses, they suggest that mental illness may refl ect genetic and environmental dysfunction of brain modulatory systems. the rats began to eat more but could not maintain their body weight. Later, they lost their ability to maintain body temperature and developed strong heat-seeking behavior, and, fi nally, they died. Although the cause of this death remains uncertain, it is suspected to result from overwhelming sepsis because of immunodeficiency. The study implied that the maintenance of metabolic caloric balance, thermal equilibrium, and immune competence require sleep Contributing to the notion that sleep has an anabolic function is the abundance of sleep in early life. REM sleep predominates in utero, where its stereotypic pattern of motor activation and its chemical microenvironment could promote CNS development Perhaps the clearest evidence of a function for sleep is for its role in consolidating recently formed memories There is also evidence that normal sleep-dependent memory consolidation is altered in patients with psychiatric disorders. Patients with schizophrenia show normal learning of the fi nger-tapping task during training, but no overnight improvement ( Does dreaming also serve a function? Answering this question is not yet possible, because we do not know how to separate possible functions of the experience of dreaming from functions of the neurobiological processes that produce it. But REM sleep dream content can predict who will become clinically depressed following marital divorce or separation Dreaming may also play a role in modifying associative memory networks. Subjects awakened from REM sleep show preferential activation of more distantly related associated than seen either during waking or during NREM sleep Sleep facilitates mathematical insight. Subjects are taught to reduce an eight-digit sequence to a single digit (9 at the right), through six intermediate calculations (in italics) with a standard algorithm. Unknown to the subjects, the task is designed so that the last three calculations form a mirror image of the preceding three, and thus the second intermediate calculation matches the fi nal answer. Right: subjects who slept between training and testing were more than twice as likely to discover the insight algorithm than those not allowed sleep.sleep, and may permit the brain to discover creative solutions to problems during sleep. Indeed, sleep has been shown to increase the likelihood of such discoveries ( Sleep represents a complex behavioral and neurobiological process that is conserved across much of the animal kingdom. REM sleep is similarly conserved across the class Mammalia. The complex, REM-NREM cycle suggests that these distinct neurophysiological and neurochemical brain states have evolved to subserve specifi c functions. One hypothesis is that the types of sleep stages and their timing across the night evolved to meet the demands of varying memory systems for effective offl ine processing during sleep. Whether dreaming also evolved to permit offl ine cognitive and affective processing remains an open question.Motivation is the process by which animals adapt to internal or external change. Such adjustments to change may involve the integration of endocrine, autonomic, and behavioral responses. Some adjustments are part of the regulatory process of homeostasis and act through negative feedback loops to correct an internal change. Indeed, motivation used to be explained largely in terms of reductions of needs, or "drives," such as those for sodium (salt) or water. This purely homeostatic explanation of motivation could plausibly account for ingestive and thermoregulatory behaviors, and possibly even the drug-seeking behavior generated by the state produced by drug withdrawal. However, it fails to explain satisfactorily behavior such as aggression, mating, or exploration, for which there are obvious external triggering stimuli but no identifiable defi cit state. It also fails to explain what happens when homeostatic mechanisms are apparently overridden by powerful external incentives, as occurs during drug binges and during overingestion of delicious food. Instead, such behavior often is explained by attractions to external stimuli that have appetitive or rewarding properties (incentive-motivation).In many cases, goals such as food or a sexual partner are not available, and an animal must search or forage for them. Therefore, motivated behavior is more than the simple control of consummatory responses that end sequences of motivated behavior, such as eating, drinking, and sexual mounting or lordosis. Consummatory behavior tends to be stereotyped and refl exive and is acquired early in an animal's life. In sequences of motivated behavior, however, consummatory behavior usually is preceded by adaptive, fl exible forms of appetitive behavior (e.g., foraging for food), which enables an animal to come into physical contact with its goal. This appetitive behavior may be simple locomotor approach responses to the goal or may include exploratory behavior and complex response sequences. In addition, appetitive behavior may occur in parallel with endocrine and autonomic responses (e.g., secretion of saliva and insulin) (Chapter 38) that prepare the animal for effi cient interaction with the goal.In the absence of immediate goals, an animal usually must use past experience to predict the likelihood of an occurrence. This learning may involve classically conditioned (i.e., Pavlovian) refl exes and goal-directed instrumental (or operant) behaviors. With the latter behaviors, an outcome that increases the occurrence of a preceding behavior is a positive reinforcer. This term often is used interchangeably with the more colloquial term reward, which connotes a positive emotional component of positive reinforcement or pleasure. However, accurately inferring subjective states in animals is diffi cult, if not impossible and both reward and positive reinforcer should be used operationally. Identifi cation of neural structures that mediate subjective phenomena, such as pleasure, may need to depend on functional neuroimaging of humans. Incentive, however, generally refers to the attractiveness of a goal, and positive reinforcement strengthens specifi c responses by presenting stimuli contingent on performance. For example, rats can learn arbitrary instrumental actions, such as a lever press, to gain access to positive reinforcers, such as food or drugs (i.e., self-administration behavior) Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition stimuli associated with these primary reinforcersconditioned reinforcers. Schedules of reinforcement vary the relationship between activity and positive reinforcement. Thus, an animal's degree of motivation can be assessed by its capacity to work for a goal.Another measure of motivation often involves the choice an animal makes (e.g., between actions that produce one stimulus associated with reward over another stimulus that is not associated with reward). Conditioned place preference is a commonly used procedure based on this principle in which choice is made between two environments, only one of which is linked to reward. A distinctive location is associated with a reinforcer such as food or a drug. Following several In an FR-1 schedule, one lever press is required to deliver an intravenous infusion of cocaine; in an FR-5 schedule, fi ve lever presses are required to deliver an infusion of cocaine, and so on. With an FR schedule, rats appear to regulate the amount of drug self-administered. Lowering the dose from the training level of 0.75 mg/kg per injection increases the number of selfadministered infusions. Raising the unit dose decreases the number of infusions. Pretreatment with the dopamine receptor antagonist SCH 23390 also increases the number of self-administered infusions. Reprinted with permission from Apparently motivated behavior can sometimes be shown to be resistant to motivational changes (e.g., satiety or other forms of devaluation of the goal such as lithium-induced illness). The assumption then is that it has acquired some habitual properties, based on the association between stimulus and response (S-R), rather than between the instrumental action and goal outcome. Such S-R "habits" may predominate after certain forms of training, particularly if prolonged The complexity of motivated behavior ( Hypothetical motivational centers were based on early concepts of brain stem centers for fundamental processes, such as respiration (Chapter 37). Though the construct of brain centers eventually fell out of favor, the original concept of homeostatic centers led many investigators to approach motivation as a search for specifi c neural or hormonal signals that could trigger neurocircuitry to initiate the appropriate behavioral responses. Such models could explain the efficient integration of many different signals to produce coordinated sequences of behavior. The hypothalamus is an ideal key structure in a circuitry for such integrative functions, given its rich blood supply and exposure to cerebrospinal fl uid (and thus access to a variety of chemical signals and the capacity also to deliver them), control over the pituitary, and neural connections (through brain stem and other centers) with visceral afferent information (e.g., taste and olfaction), autonomic and somatic motor outfl ow. The concept of mutually inhibitory centers for the initiation (hunger) and suppression (satiety) of feeding arose from such a view (Chapter 34) (Box 43.1).On the basis of the criteria just described, the list of hypothalamic motivational centers originally was extended to include behaviors as diverse as drinking, thermoregulation, aggression, and sex (Chapter 34). Thus, for example, thermoregulatory behavior, such as refl exive shivering, panting, and grooming, is impaired by lesions of the preoptic region of the hypothalamus and is elicited by cooling or warming of this region A particularly well-studied example is that of sexual motivation. Some hypothalamic nuclei contain high concentrations of steroid receptors (e.g., for estradiol and testosterone), especially the medial preoptic area and the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus. In male rats, copulatory behavior is abolished by medial preoptic area lesions The intermingling of hypothalamic neural mechanisms controlling thermoregulation, maternal behavior, feeding, and mating suggests that these behaviors 1. Electrolytic lesions produced profound aphagia (abstention from eating).2. Electrical stimulation of the brain through electrodes implanted in the lateral hypothalamus induced eating in sated rats Although many of these experimental observations have remained valid, subsequent evidence has suggested that the lateral hypothalamus has a much more specifi c role in feeding motivation, as a result of using improved techniques (see main text). Moreover, many of the effects associated with diminishing and increasing activity within the lateral hypothalamus have been shown subsequently to depend upon coincidental infl uences on axons within the medial forebrain bundle that merely passes through the lateral hypothalamus (e.g., between midbrain and striatum or between prefrontal cortex and brainstem) and had little to do functionally with the lateral hypothalamus itself. Only through the use of several neurobiological techniques providing converging evidence can the relationships between brain and behavior become more certain.share controls in many circumstances. In summary, a wide variety of motivational states expressed as easily elicited, sometimes stereotypical and species-specifi c behaviors are represented within the hypothalamus and related structures.Many studies of the role of the hypothalamus in motivation have concentrated on measuring consummatory rather than learned instrumental behavior, a research strategy that may lead to misleading conclusions about motivational changes in general. For example, rats with preoptic lesions will not respond to thermal stress with refl ex mechanisms such as shivering, adjustment of food intake, nest building, or changes in locomotion. However, they will learn to press a lever for hot or cool air and can achieve thermoregulation by this means This dissociation between consummatory and instrumental behaviors is important because damage to a component of the limbic system, the amygdala, is known to produce the opposite pattern of effectsunimpaired mounting but reduced instrumental behavior Electrolytic lesions of the lateral hypothalamus cause dramatic defi cits in food intake. However, not only do such lesions affect more than simply feeding behavior, they also destroy far more than the lateral hypothalamic region itself, mainly by interrupting ascending and descending fi bers in the medial forebrain bundle Recovery from the lateral hypothalamic syndrome and the syndrome produced by 6-OHDA is similar Despite these similarities, subtle differences between the two syndromes cannot be explained by this dopamine hypothesis. For example, 6-OHDA-lesioned rats, unlike animals with lateral hypothalamic lesions, are  not somnolent (drowsy), are less fi nicky about food, and have fewer defi cits in thermoregulation, taste aversion, learning, and oral motor performance. However, the most compelling difference is that rats with lateral hypothalamic lesions and the full syndrome have only 50% depletion of striatal dopamine, whereas 6-OHDA-lesioned rats (even with less than the full syndrome) have greater than 90% depletion of striatal dopamine. Therefore, damage to the lateral hypothalamus itself or to fi bers of passage, in addition to those of the ascending dopamine system, apparently contributes to the lateral hypothalamic syndrome.The neurotoxins kainic, ibotenic, and quisqualic acids are structurally related to the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate. They bind to various subtypes of glutamate receptors and essentially stimulate neurons to death. These excitotoxins can be used to produce lesions of cell bodies while sparing fi bers of passage. Electrolytic and mechanical lesions, in contrast, damage soma and fi bers. Despite sparing striatal dopamine, such cell body lesions lead to severe problems with eating, followed by long-lasting defi cits in homeostasis A central question for research in this area is what is the precise nature of the contribution by the dopamine system to motivation? Some clues to answering this question were provided by experiments in which rats received unilateral 6-OHDA lesions of the nigrostriatal system. The rats rotated toward the side of the lesion following treatment with a dopamine-releasing drug, such as D-amphetamine More relevant to this question is that unilateral lesions of the lateral hypothalamus or nigrostriatal dopamine system also produce polymodal sensorimotor neglect, measured by responses to contralateral somatic, auditory, and olfactory stimuli-a syndrome initially attributed to sensory inattention Animals with lesions of the nigrostriatal system retain the capacity for movement; they do not have an irreversible motor defi cit. However, they have great diffi culty in starting that movement without an intact dopamine system. It is instructive to compare this with the problems that patients with Parkinson's disease have with movement initiation, since they too have a severe defi cit in nigrostriatal dopamine (Chapter 31). To identify the circumstances in which the dopamine system normally becomes active, in vivo neurochemical techniques, such as microdialysis and voltammetry Sensory and motor aspects of the neglect syndrome were separated in the following way Responses of dopamine neurons to unpredicted primary reward (Top) and the transfer of this response to progressively earlier reward-predicting conditioned stimuli with training (Middle). (Bottom) the record shows a control baseline task when the reward is predicted by an earlier stimulus and not the light. From the anatomical mapping of the central reward or reinforcement mechanisms of the brain Later work showed that animals also can learn behaviors to stimulate other sites through ICSS (e.g., the locus coeruleus, midbrain central gray, cerebellum, trigeminal motor nucleus, substantia nigra, caudate nucleus, and nucleus accumbens) Electrical stimulation of the brain can be used as positive reinforcement of learned behaviors. An apparatus is set up so that when an animal presses a lever, its brain is stimulated. Alternatively, a threshold procedure can be used where a lever or wheel response is required. An advantage of using electrical stimulation to measure motivation is that the strength of the reward can be titrated easily by adjusting the amount of current delivered for each response. If the current is adjusted too low (i.e., below the threshold for reinforcement), then the animals will not press the lever. As current is increased, the relationship between the rate of lever pressing and the strength of current typically follows a sigmoidal curve called rate-intensity function. In the threshold procedure, a series of discrete trials are presented at different current intensities, and the responses within a certain cutoff period are recorded. Current levels are lowered and raised to capture the threshold current ( In fact, depletion of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens does not impair consummatory behavior in rats (unlike dopamine depletion from the caudateputamen), but it does reduce incentive-motivational responses. For example, proceptive behaviors (such as "ear wiggling," hopping, and darting, all of which serve to solicit the attention of the male) are reduced in female rats with dopamine depletions. Also, depletion of dopamine from the nucleus accumbens decreases locomotor excitement of hungry rats in the presence of food There is growing evidence that the amygdala subserves positive emotional functions, as well as negative functions such as fear. For example, monkeys with lesions of the temporal pole, including the amygdala, poorly learn new stimulus/reward associations, suggesting an altered emotional response to reward. In rats, excitotoxic, axon-sparing lesions of the amygdala diminish the capacity of stimuli associated with reward to motivate behavior. Such lesions also impair responses that are rewarded with access to female rats. However, mating per se is unaffected, in contrast with the effect of medial preoptic area lesions The ventral striatum, including the nucleus accumbens, is part of a system that receives afferents from several limbic cortical structures, including the basolateral amygdala, the hippocampal formation, and the prefrontal cortex, and projects to structures such as the lateral hypothalamus and ventral pallidum As described earlier, the basal and lateral amygdala convey associative information about stimuli that predict the occurrence of reinforcers. The recipients of this information are systems that select responses. A link between the amygdala and the ventral striatum is important in the translation of emotion (and motivational effects of stimuli) to behavioral output, or action Drug abuse is one of the world's major public health problems. For example, statistics from the 2005 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse of the National Institute on Drug Abuse of the United States reveal that approximately 20 million Americans aged 12 and older were past-month users of illicit drugs 126 million were past-month users of alcohol. Furthermore, 22 million past-month users of illicit drugs or alcohol could be classifi ed with substance dependence or abuse in the past year. In addition, 60 million were current smokers (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Drug addiction, also known as substance dependence, is a chronically relapsing disorder characterized by (1) compulsion to seek and take the drug, (2) loss of control in limiting intake, and (3) emergence of a negative emotional state (e.g., dysphoria, anxiety, irritability) when access to the drug is prevented (defi ned here as dependence) state Addiction has been conceptualized as a chronic relapsing disorder with roots both in impulsivity and compulsivity and neurobiological mechanisms that change as an individual moves from one domain to the other. Subjects with impulse control disorders experience an increasing sense of tension or arousal before committing an impulsive act; pleasure, gratifi cation, or Duration criterion B. No duration criterion separately specifi ed. However, several dependence criteria must occur repeatedly as specifi ed by duration qualifi ers associated with criteria (e.g., "often," "persistent," "continued").B. No duration criterion separately specifi ed.With physiological dependence: Evidence of tolerance or withdrawal (i.e., any of items A-1 or A-2 above are present).Without physiological dependence: No evidence of tolerance or withdrawal (i.e., none of items A-1 or A-2 above are present).relief at the time of committing the act; and fi nally regret, self-reproach, or guilt following the act. In contrast, individuals with compulsive disorders experience anxiety and stress before committing a compulsive repetitive behavior, and then relief from the stress by performing the compulsive behavior. In addiction, drug-taking behavior progresses from impulsivity to compulsivity in a three-stage cycle: binge/intoxication, withdrawal/negative affect, and preoccupation/anticipation. As individuals move from an impulsive to a compulsive disorder, the drive for the drug-taking behavior shifts from positive to negative reinforcement The midbrain and forebrain appear to be involved in motivated behavior through connections of the medial forebrain bundle, composed of ascending and descending pathways, including most of the brain monoamine systems Amphetamine and cocaine are psychomotor stimulants that, in humans, have behavioral effects such as suppressing hunger and fatigue and inducing euphoria. In animals, these drugs increase locomotor activity, decrease food intake, stimulate operant behavior, enhance conditioned responding, and produce place  preferences Psychomotor stimulants with a high potential for abuse have effects that lead to increases in the availability of monoamine neurotransmitters at synapses. By blocking reuptake or enhancing release, cocaine and amphetamine increase the synaptic availability of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. However, the acute reinforcing effects of these drugs depend critically on dopamine of intravenous self-administration have provided the most direct evidence implicating dopamine, and more specifi cally the mesolimbic dopamine system, in the reinforcing actions of cocaine and amphetamines. Low doses of dopamine receptor antagonists injected either systemically or centrally into the nucleus accumbens, amygdala, or bed nucleus of the stria terminalis block cocaine and amphetamine self-administration in rats Under certain circumstances, repeated administration of stimulants and opiates results in increasingly larger motor-activating effects, and these effects have been hypothesized to contribute to the development of the neuroadaptations associated with addiction, particularly those involving initial use and/or reinstatement of drug-taking following abstinence. This sensitization to the activating effects of stimulants involves activation of the mesolimbic dopamine system Multiple mechanisms for sensitization have been proposed, and a common theme is a time-dependent chain of adaptations that ultimately leads to longlasting changes in the function of the mesolimbic dopamine system The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal stress axis also may play an important role in sensitization. Stressors can cause sensitization to stimulant drugs, and both the stress axis and the extrahypothalamic corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) system appear to be important in stress-induced sensitization. Sensitization may be hypothesized to play a key role in initial sensitivity to drugs and contribute to the high incentive salience attributed to drugs during the course of addiction.Much like psychostimulants, opiate drugs such as heroin are readily self-administered intravenously by animals, and with limited access opiates do not produce dependence tegmental area and nucleus accumbens. However, heroin self-administration is not blocked by dopamine receptor antagonists administered at doses that block cocaine self-administration nor by large neurotoxininduced lesions of the mesolimbic dopamine system. These results demonstrate that neural elements in the regions of the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens are responsible for the reinforcing properties of opiates, suggesting both dopamine-dependent and dopamine-independent opiate actions Nicotine has anti-fatigue, stimulant-like, and antianxiety effects and appears to improve cognitive performance in animals and humans. It has direct reinforcing actions, as measured by intravenous selfadministration in animals and humans. Nicotine is a direct agonist at nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and appears to activate nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the mesolimbic dopamine system both at the level of the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens Alcohol (i.e., ethanol), barbiturates, and benzodiazepines all have measurable sedative-hypnotic actions, including euphoria, disinhibition, anxiety reduction, sedation, and hypnosis. All of these drugs also have anxiolytic (or antianxiety) effects, refl ected in confl ict situations as a reduction of behavior suppressed by punishment. The neurobiological basis of the anxiolytic properties of these sedative-hypnotic drugs has provided clues to their reinforcing properties and their abuse potential. For example, GABAergic receptor antagonists reverse many of the behavioral effects of alcohol, an observation that has led to the hypothesis that GABA has a role in its intoxicating effects. Further support for a role of brain GABA in alcohol reinforcement is the observation that potent antagonists of GABA receptor function decrease alcohol reinforcement, and one particularly affected brain site is the central nucleus of the amygdala. Activation of opioid peptide systems has been implicated in alcohol reinforcement by numerous reports that the opiate antagonists naloxone and naltrexone reduce alcohol self-administration in several animal models Δ 9 -Tetrahydrocannabinol Has Effects Similar to Other Drugs of Abuse THC shares effects in animal models of drug reinforcement similar to those of other drugs of abuse. Upon acute administration, THC decreases ICSS reward thresholds and produces a place preference in rats. It maintains self-administration behavior in squirrel monkeys, and a synthetic THC analog is selfadministered intravenously in mice. THC binds to the cannabinoid CB 1 receptor that is distributed widely throughout the brain, particularly in the striatum, and is thought to mediate some of the actions of the endogenous endocannabinoids. THC self-administration is blocked by both CB 1 and opioid receptor antagonists Substance dependence is defi ned as compulsive, uncontrollable drug use (see above); however, the etiology of that compulsive use is controversial. One position is that the positive reinforcing effects of a drug are critical for addiction. Partially as a result of this concept, another position-substance dependence as the alleviation of withdrawal symptoms-fell out of favor as an explanation for compulsive drug use. However, although simple positive reinforcement clearly is necessary for the development of drug use, it falls short in explaining the development of compulsive use. For example, tolerance or apparent tolerance develops to drug reward during chronic use, with positive reinforcement either being absent or subsumed by negative reinforcement. Indeed, this issue raises the question of what factors distinguish drug use from abuse and dependence or addiction. Sensitization theory addresses this issue by invoking a shift to a state of incentive salience, defi ned as a hypersensitive neural state that produces the experience of craving. It has been hypothesized that this state of incentive salience is produced by drug-induced sensitization of the mesolimbic dopamine system Withdrawal signs associated with cessation of chronic drug administration usually are characterized by responses that are opposite to the initial effects of the drug. Thus, all drugs of abuse produce rewarding effects and a withdrawal syndrome associated with subjective symptoms of dysphoria, negative affect, and anxiety In animal studies, withdrawal from chronic administration of stimulants has been studied using ICSS after repeated administration of cocaine or amphetamine over several weeks or 12-48 h of cocaine self-administration. Withdrawal from prolonged selfadministration of cocaine in rats increases ICSS reward thresholds. The increase in threshold dose is timedependent and is an effect opposite to that of acute cocaine A brain system that mediates aversion was identifi ed early on by a combination of anatomical and behavioral experiments. For example, mapping studies identifi ed sites eliciting escape from brain stimulation, sites at which electrical brain stimulation elicits defensive responses, and sites at which fear or pain naturally evokes aggressive responses. Many of these pathways appear to be central refl ex pathways, with both ascending and descending components modulated by infl uences from the central nucleus of the amygdala.Some electrical brain stimulation sites (e.g., ventral medial hypothalamus) produced markedly ambivalent reinforcing effects, which were interpreted as an interaction between positive reinforcement and aversion systems. Electrical brain stimulation itself has been suggested to have both appetitive and aversive properties, as have drugs of abuse and, in some situations, electric shock. In fact, animal learning theory has led to the concept of opponent motivational processes (one appetitive, one aversive).It has been suggested that many reinforcers produce affective and hedonic effects (a-processes) that are opposed by b-processes of opposite affective sign in a simple, dynamic control system for affect How might these opponent processes be represented in the brain? The neurobiological basis for neuroadaptive mechanisms that refl ect changes in reward function have been hypothesized to be alterations of the same neurotransmitters implicated in the acute reinforcing effects of drugs Monoamines, including the dopamine and serotonin systems, have been implicated in the reinforcing actions of each of the drugs discussed: psychostimulants, opiates, nicotine, alcohol, and THC. One way of assessing the prolonged effects of drug self-administration is to measure extracellular levels of a neurotransmitter during ongoing behaviors, such as intravenous selfadministration of a drug or withdrawal from the drug after a period of chronic self-administration. Such measurements can be made by using the technique of in vivo microdialysis, which involves implanting into a specifi c site in the brain a guide cannula through which a probe with a semipermeable membrane at the tip perfuses and collects the neurotransmitter in extracellular fl uid. Several studies using this technique have shown that extracellular dopamine and serotonin levels in the nucleus accumbens decrease during acute withdrawal from cocaine, opiates, and alcohol, an effect opposite to that of acute drug administration.Anxiety and stress are common elements of substance dependence and acute withdrawal from drugs of abuse in humans and produce stress-like behavior in animals Norepinephrine in the limbic forebrain also has been associated with the physical and motivational signs of opiate withdrawal. More recent evidence suggests that projections to the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis-a critical part of the extended amygdalamay have a role in the motivational effects of opiate withdrawal In contrast to the sensitization theory, neuroadaptation theories such as the opponent process theory postulate that the processes of tolerance to the positive emotional state (hedonic tolerance) and subsequent development of a negative emotional state play important roles in the transition from drug use to drug dependence An explanation for the chronic relapsing nature of drug addiction is that reinforcement can be derived from secondary sources that motivate continued drug use. Both positive and negative emotional states can become associated with stimuli in the drug-taking environment through classical conditioning processes. When the drug taker is reexposed to these conditioned stimuli, compulsive drug use is reestablished (Box 43.6).Conditioning to the positive emotional states induced by drugs has been demonstrated in animals. Counteradaptive processes, such as opponent process, that are part of normal homeostatic limitations of reward function can fail to return within the normal range and are hypothesized to contribute to the allostatic state of addiction. Allostasis from the addiction perspective is defi ned as the process of maintaining apparent reward function stability by changes in brain reward mechanisms. The allostatic state is fueled not only by dysregulation of reward circuits per se, but also by the activation of brain and hormonal stress systems Stimuli associated with drugs of abuse can maintain responding in rats and monkeys when presented without the drug. It is also possible to demonstrate conditioned withdrawal. For example, when previously neutral stimuli are paired with naloxone-induced withdrawal, the neutral stimuli themselves elicit signs of opiate withdrawal. Conditioned withdrawal has been observed in opiate-dependent animals and humans.Neurobiological substrates for conditioned drug effects have been investigated in some detail Neuroanatomic and functional data have provided the basis for the hypothesis that the central nucleus of the amygdala and the bed nucleus of the stria termiCraving is a hypothetical construct that can be defi ned as the memory of the rewarding effects of a drug, superimposed upon a negative motivational state Craving Type 1: Craving is induced by stimuli that have been paired with drug self-administration such as environmental cues. Termed conditioned positive reinforcement in experimental psychology, an animal model of Craving Type 1 is cue-induced reinstatement where a cue previously paired with access to drug reinstates responding for a lever that has been extinguished. Another example is drug-induced reinstatement where a small dose of the drug elicits responding for a lever that has been extinguished.Craving Type-2: Craving is conceptualized as a state change characterized by anxiety and dysphoria or a residual negative emotional state that combines with Craving Type 1 situations to produce relapse to drug seeking. Animal models of Craving Type 2 include stress-induced reinstatement of drug seeking after extinction, or increased drug taking in animals during or after a prolonged deprivation. Craving Type 2 can be conceptualized as a residual negative emotional state or an acute stress-like state, both of which can elicit drugseeking behavior. BOX 43.6 C R A V I N G nalis form a separate entity within the basal forebrain termed the extended amygdala Brain imaging studies using positron emission tomography with ligands for measuring oxygen utilization or glucose metabolism or using functional magnetic resonance imaging techniques have provided important insights into the neurocircuitry changes in the human brain associated with the development, maintenance, and even vulnerability to addiction.These imaging results, overall, have a striking resemblance to the neurocircuitry identifi ed by animal studies. During acute intoxication with drugs such as cocaine, methamphetamine, nicotine, alcohol, and THC there are changes in the orbitofrontal cortex, prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala, and ventral striatum. These changes are refl ected in activation as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging, and changes in oxygen utilization as measured by positron emission tomography. The changes during acute intoxication often are accompanied by an increase in the availability of dopamine, particularly in striatal regions.In contrast, during acute and chronic withdrawal there is a reversal of these changes, with decreases in metabolic activity in the orbitofrontal cortex, prefrontal cortex, and anterior cingulate cortex, and decreases in basal dopamine activity in the striatum and prefrontal cortex as refl ected in decreases in D 2 receptor binding ( Not only can the functional activity of neurotransmitters change due to the increased presynaptic activity of chronic drug use, but these changes also can be translated to postsynaptic signal transduction, where changes can be long-lasting and may result in longterm adaptations in receptor function. These changes take place at the level of receptor binding or in the impact that the association of a drug with its receptor has on a postsynaptic cell. For example, whereas chronic opiate use has minimal effects on the binding of opiate receptors by opioid peptides, it dramatically changes signal transduction in the terminal regions of the mesolimbic dopamine system, such as the nucleus accumbens The persistence of changes in drug reinforcement mechanisms that characterize drug addiction suggests that the underlying molecular mechanisms are longlasting, and considerable attention has been given to the drug regulation of gene expression. Current research focuses on several types of transcription factors, including cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element binding protein and novel Fos-like proteins termed chronic Fos-related antigens. More recently, FosB, a member of the Fos family of transcription factors that dimerizes with a member of the Jun family to form activator protein-1 transcription factor complexes, has been implicated in the adaptation to chronic exposure to drugs of abuse. Activator protein-1 transcription factor complexes bind to sites in the regulatory regions of many genes. Acute administration of several drugs of abuse activates c-fos and Fosrelated antigens, but chronic administration of drugs of abuse eliminates these activations and produces a gradual accumulation of FosB. This highly stable protein is hypothesized to function as a sustained molecular switch contributing to vulnerability to relapse after prolonged periods of abstinence Genetic and molecular genetic animal models have provided a convergence of data to provide hypotheses regarding vulnerability to addiction in some of the neuropharmacological substrates identifi ed in neurocircuitry studies. High alcohol-preferring rats have been bred that show high voluntary consumption of alcohol, increased anxiety-like responses, and numerous neuropharmacological phenotypes such as decreased dopaminergic activity and decreased neuropeptide Y activity, both of which have support from genetic studies of chromosomal linkage Advances in molecular biology have led to the ability to systematically inactivate the genes that control the expression of proteins that make up receptors or neurotransmitter/neuromodulators in the central nervous system using the gene knockout approach. Knockout mice have a gene inactivated by homologous recombination. A knockout mouse deficient in both alleles of a gene is homozygous for the deletion and is termed a null mutation (−/−). Although such an approach does not guarantee that these genes are the ones that are vulnerable in the human population, they provide viable candidates for exploring the genetic basis of endophenotypes associated with addiction .Notable positive results with gene knockout studies in mice have focused on knockout of the m opioid receptor, which eliminates opioid, nicotine, alcohol and cannabinoid reward in mice Much of the allure of the neurosciences stems from the common conviction that there is something unusual about the human brain and its behavioral capacities. Nevertheless, modern neuroscientists have paid rather little attention to the study of brain evolution, and so our understanding of how the human brain differs from that of other animals is very rudimentary. In part, this neglect is due to a widely held belief that mammalian brains are all essentially similar in their internal structure and that species differ mainly in the size of the brain. This chapter reviews the modern evidence concerning brain evolution and shows that brain structure, far from being uniform across species, exhibits some remarkable variations. Because the subject is vast, the discussion is necessarily selective. Thus, after a brief review of evolutionary principles, this chapter describes the evolutionary history of three groups of vertebrates that are of special interest to people: mammals, primates, and humans themselves. The major steps are outlined in the evolution of our large, complex, and extremely useful brains from the smaller, simpler brains of the fi rst mammals, focusing on the neocortex, as this part of the brain has been studied most extensively. The neocortex is disproportionately large in humans and is critically involved in mental activities and processes that are considered to be distinctly human.There are three main ways to learn about how different brains have evolved. First, the fossil record can be studied. Much of what we have learned about the evolution of vertebrates in general has come from studying fossils. However, because bones readily fossilize, whereas soft tissues seldom do, we know a lot about the bones of our ancestors, but much less about everything else. Of course, one can infer much about some soft tissues, such as muscles, from their effects on bones, and this is true for brains as well. The brains of mammals fi ll the skull tightly, and thus the skull cavity of fossils rather closely refl ects the size and shape of the brain, and even the locations of major fi ssures. Much has been learned and written about the changes in brain size from the fossil record We can even learn something about the functional organization of the neocortex from fossils. For instance, subdivisions of the body representation in the primary somatosensory cortex often are marked by fi ssures in the brain, and fi ssure patterns revealed by endocasts (internal casts of the brain case) from fossil skulls have been used to suggest specializations of the somatosensory cortex in extinct mammals. Unfortunately, little of the brain's great internal complexity is revealed by its size, shape, and fi ssures. Thus, to learn more about brain evolution, it is necessary to study the brains of extant (present-day) species and use comparative methods to deduce the organization of ancestral brains. There has been great progress since the early 1980s in understanding how to use comparative approaches to study evolution. In the fi nal analysis, even studies of the fossil record involve a comparative approach. It is seldom known, for example, whether any given fossil was an actual ancestor of another fossil, but only that the comparative evidence, together with suitable times of existence, suggests that they could be.As Darwin (1859) recognized, each living species represents the living tip of a largely dead branch of an extremely bushy tree of life. By examining other living tips of the tree, we can infer much about the organizations of the brains (and other body parts) of ancestors that occupied the branching points of this tree. Theories of brain evolution, including those of the evolution of the human brain, depend on reconstructing the probable features of the brains of ever more distant relatives.The comparative method depends on (1) examining the brains of suitable ranges of extant species and Although the brains of some mammals may have retained more primitive characteristics than others, it is dangerous to assume that the brain of any living mammal fully represents an ancestral condition. Brain features need to be evaluated trait by trait in a comparative context, as any particular feature could be primitive (i.e., ancestral) or derived. To reconstruct the course of brain evolution, we need to distinguish ancestral and derived characters rather than ancestral and derived species. The existence of a mixture of ancestral and derived features in a single species is referred to as mosaic evolution.A third source of information about brain evolution is based on understandings of the mechanisms and modes of brain development and the constraints they impose on evolution. For example, To understand brain evolution, we need to understand the evolutionary relationships among mammals, which are summarized in biological classifi cations (taxonomies). The science of classifi cation (known as "systematics") has a long history, but an early classification that divided the world into "things that belong to the Emperor and things that don't" is clearly outmoded. Our modern understanding of plant and animal relationships emerged from the efforts of the Swedish naturalist Linnaeus (1707-1778), who grouped species into ever-larger categories (species, genus, family, order, class, phylum) according to degrees of resemblance and dissimilarity. We now understand why life forms exhibit the particular pattern of similarities and differences they do, and we have a logic for extending and refi ning the Linnaean system. In brief, complex life on Earth appears to have evolved only once. It is based on a molecular template that is passed on from generation to generation and yet is modifi able. Because this molecular material usually is not exchanged between individuals from different species, a phylogenetic classifi cation can be derived that refl ects times of divergence from common ancestors. Similarities retained over time refl ect the preservation of parts of the code, whereas differences refl ect alterations in the code. The many different modifi cations of the genome in the many diverging lines of descent over billions of years have led to the great diversity of life that we see today. Our current classifi cation scheme is based on our understanding of phylogenetic (ancestor-descendant) relationships. Because this understanding continues to grow, parts of the classifi cation scheme continue to be modifi ed. Phylogenetic relationships are deduced from comparative evidence. The entomologist Willi Hennig (1966) helped reinvigorate this fi eld of study when he formulated a rigorous comparative method of reconstructing phylogenetic relationships, sometimes known as "cladistics." The term refl ects Hennig's emphasis on the correct identifi cation of "clades," groups of organisms that share a common ancestor. A clade is simply a branch of the evolutionary tree, which is connected through a set of ancestors (which are the branching points of the tree) to all the other branches in the tree. In Hennig's method, evolutionary relationships are reconstructed by a process of "character analysis." A character is any observable feature or attribute of an organism. A character could be a feature of the brain, such as the corpus callosum between the two cerebral hemispheres, or a feature of any other part of the body, or (as is often the case today) a molecule or a DNA sequence. By considering the states of as many characters as possible-for example, whether a corpus callosum is present (as it is in placental mammals) or absent (as in other vertebrates)-and by adopting the assumption that closely related species will share more character states than distantly related species, one can arrive at a hypothesis about the relationships of the groups being examined. Because a given character state can evolve independently in different lineages (e.g., forelimbs that function as wings evolved independently in birds and bats), not every character will yield an accurate picture of evolutionary relationships. It is therefore important to base reconstructions of evolutionary relationships on as many characters as possible. Typically, a very large number of possible trees can be generated from a given character analysis; the tree that requires the smallest number of changes to account for the observed pattern of character states (the maximum-parsimony solution) usually is considered to be the best estimate of the correct tree. The growth of molecular biology has provided a new source of comparative information to supplement character analyses based on anatomical characteristics, helping to improve the resolution of modern mammalian trees To communicate precisely, comparative biologists have developed a specialized nomenclature. The concepts of homology and analogy are central to comparative biology (Box 44.1). A group of species that all share a common evolutionary history is a natural taxon or a monophyletic group, which is the same thing as a clade. "Unnatural" taxa are groups that either exclude one or more of an ancestor's descendants (paraphyletic groups) or that combine descendants of multiple ancestors (polyphyletic groups). The traditional classifi cation of the great apes (orangutans, gorillas, chimpanzees) in the family Pongidae now is known to be paraphyletic because it excludes humans, which share a recent common ancestor with chimpanzees and gorillas. If a character state is found throughout a monophyletic group, it likely was present in the common ancestor of the group or even earlier. Thus, comparisons are necessary with members of a sister group, which is the monophyletic taxon thought to be related most closely to the group under study.To determine whether a character is derived (new) or ancestral, one examines members of one or more outgroup, the more distant relatives of the group under examination. The direction of change is called its polarity. For example, mammals include forms that lay eggs, the monotremes, whereas the sister group of monotremes, the marsupial-placental group, gives birth to live offspring. We can determine the polarity of these character states (egg laying, live birth) by examining out groups; that is, by examining other vertebrates like reptiles and amphibians. Because most nonmammalian vertebrates lay eggs, we conclude that egg laying is ancestral for mammals, and live birth derived.Probably the most serious misconception about brain evolution is that theories of evolutionary change are necessarily highly speculative Homology and analogy are two of the most important concepts in evolutionary biology. Both terms refer to similarity, but to similarity arising from different sources. The terms can be applied to any biological characteristic or feature, including brain structures and even behavior. In our efforts to understand brain evolution, features of brains are compared across species, and it is important to deduce if these features have been inherited from a common ancestor or emerged independently. The two terms refl ect conclusions based on the available evidence, and uncertainty is common.When different species possess similar characteristics because they inherited them from a common ancestor, the characteristics are said to be homologous. This does not mean they are identical in structure or function. For example, all mammals appear to have a primary somatosensory area, S1, as a subdivision of neocortex. This structure appears to be involved in electroreception in the duck-billed platypus, a monotreme, but not in other mammals. Humans and monotremes have inherited an S1 from a distant ancestor (at least 150 million years ago), but subsequently, ancestors have specialized S1 in quite different ways.Characteristics that have evolved independently are referred to as analogous or homoplaseous. Some authors prefer to refer to similarities in function as analogous and similarities in appearance as homoplaseous, whereas others use the terms interchangeably or prefer analogous as the more common term. As an example, most primates and some carnivores such as cats divide the primary visual cortex, V1, into alternating bands of tissue activated mostly by one eye or the other, the so-called ocular dominance columns or bands. Because carnivores and primates almost certainly diverged from a common ancestor that did not have ocular dominance columns, we conclude that this way of subdividing visual cortex evolved independently at least two times. When analogous similarities evolve, the process is called convergent or parallel evolution (parallel if the sequences of changes were similar).Both homology and analogy can be applied to structures or to specifi c features of structures. The forelimbs of bats and birds are homologous as forelimbs because both bats and birds inherited forelimbs from their common ancestors. The common ancestor of bats and birds did not fl y, however, and the modifi cations that have transformed the forelimbs of bats and birds into wings evolved independently; these wing-like characteristics are therefore analogous. Correctly identifying homologies is a very important step in deducing the course of evolution of the human brain. Features such as S1, which are homologous in most or nearly all mammals, must have evolved early with the fi rst mammals or before, whereas features common to only primates, such as the middle temporal visual area (MT), would have emerged much later in only the line leading to the fi rst primates. Some brain features related to language production may have arisen quite recently with the emergence of archaic or modern humans. Identifying homologies and their distributions across groups of related mammals (clades) allows us to reconstruct the details of brain evolution in the different lines of descent, including the one leading to modern humans.The problem of distinguishing homologies from analogies is that both are identifi ed by similarities. However, analogous structures have similarities based on common adaptations for functional roles, and thus they should also vary greatly in details unrelated to function. In contrast, homologous structures likely have retained many details from a common ancestor that may not be functionally necessary. Thus, aspects of structures that appear to be unessential may count more in judging homologies. Much can also be deduced from studying brain development and the development of similarities. Of course, knowledge about the phyletic (cladistic) distribution of similarities is critical, as is accounting for differences in structures by fi nding species with intermediate types. Ultimately, one hopes to have evidence for so many similarities that the independent evolution of them all seems extremely improbable, or suffi cient evidence from differences to indicate that the similarities in structures were acquired independently. Often the evidence is far from compelling, and opinions may change with new evidence. analysis). It is not the case that one opinion is as good as the next, although such a view has allowed poorly founded theories to persist.Another serious misconception is that evolution has a single goal or direction. This stems from the persistent belief in a "phylogenetic scale" that starts with lowly forms such as sponges; proceeds with insects, fi sh, amphibians, reptiles, and various mammals at successively higher levels; and reaches its pinnacle with humans. This view that the history of life is like a scale or ladder refl ects the popular idea that evolution is primarily a process of progressive improvement, a philosophical and religious viewpoint that reassuringly identifi es us as the most perfect species. However, evolutionary biologists have long recognized the great diversity of life and have adopted from Darwin the branching tree as a metaphor for the process whereby parent species divide to form daughter species, with each branch becoming adapted to its particular environment through natural selection. This perspective still leaves a place for progress in evolution, if progress means to become better adapted, but there are so many different ways organisms can become better adapted-most of which do not involve becoming bigger brained or smarter-that there can be no single dimension of progress, as the phylogenetic scale implies. Progress, for example, might mean reducing the size of the visual system to reduce metabolic costs in mammals living underground. Thus, there is also no universal trend toward increased complexity, as evolving brains sometimes simplify by reducing or losing parts.Overall, the brains of many mammalian groups evolved to get bigger, but this change partly refl ects the fact that they started off small, and it was more often adaptive to get bigger than smaller. However, mammals with very small brains, near the theoretical limit of smallness in mammalian brain size, persist today and there are reasons to think that small brain size is not the primitive condition in all these groups, but sometimes resulted from relatively recent reductions in brain size. Interestingly, domestic mammals, with our efforts to improve a wild stock, generally have reduced brain size. Evolutionary biologists make a distinction between traits that are ancestral (also termed primitive or plesiomorphic) from those that are recently acquired (also known as derived or apomorphic), but this distinction does not imply that primitive is simple and that derived is complex.A third misconception is that ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny. At one time, evolution was thought to proceed by sequentially adding new parts (terminal addition), and that in the development of complex forms, the newest parts were those added last. Thus, the evolutionary history of any organism would be revealed in its sequence of development. Though this is not the case in general, the study of brain development remains relevant to the study of brain evolution because evolution occurs through alterations in the course of development. It is also the case that many changes in the course of development that have led to new adaptations have occurred in the later stages of development, primarily because alterations in early stages often are lethal or produce profoundly different and maladaptive adult forms. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that the course of development can be altered in many ways and at many stages. Studies of brain development are useful because they can indicate how homologous structures that appear dissimilar in adults arose from forms that were more similar early in development.The concepts of progress and terminal addition have led some investigators to consider certain features of the brains of such mammals as humans, monkeys, and cats as either relatively old or new on the basis of their histological appearance. Poorly differentiated areas of neocortex-areas with indistinct lamination-were considered to be ancient, and welldifferentiated areas were thought to be new. For example, because the primary visual cortex (V1) has very highly differentiated layers in many primates, including humans, V1 has been considered by some to be a recently acquired area of the cortex. However, a comparative analysis indicates that the primary visual cortex (V1) is as old as the fi rst mammals, perhaps much older. The cellular layers of V1 were poorly differentiated in early mammals, and they remain poorly differentiated in many living species. Yet, humans do not have the most highly laminated V1: this distinction belongs to the tarsier, a tiny, nocturnal primate with enormous eyes. As another example, the superior colliculus or optic tectum, an ancient visual structure, has well-differentiated layers in many birds and reptiles, but they are poorly or moderately differentiated in many mammals (including humans), yet well differentiated in other mammals, such as squirrels and tree shrews.The hallmark of the evolution of mammalian brains was the emergence of the neocortex. The cerebral cortex (or pallium) covers the deeper parts of the forebrain (telencephalon). In mammals, the cortex generally is divided into three parts: the lateral paleocortex or olfactory piriform cortex, the medial archicortex or hippocampus and subiculum, and the neocortex or isocortex lying in between Although the neocortex has a nearly uniform histological appearance, its considerable variability in size and organization is what allows mammals to differ so much in behavior and abilities. To understand how variations in the neocortex make this possible, it is necessary to identify ancestral features of the neocortex, that is, features that were present in the last common ancestor of living mammals, and then determine how this organization was modifi ed in different lineages of living mammals, such as primates.The laminar organization of the neocortex appears to be similar in most mammals, suggesting that the ancestral design was so useful that many features have been retained in modern groups. For example, in most mammals and over most of the neocortex, six layers can be recognized Early mammals had small brains with little neocortex. By comparing the histological appearance of the neocortex in extant mammals of differing lines of descent, we can conclude that the neocortex of early mammals was not as highly differentiated in terms of distinct layers and neuron types as is the cortex of many modern mammals. However, the cortex likely was not homogeneous in appearance either. In present-day mammals, the primary sensory areas typically have a noticeably different layer 4 (the receiving layer) with somewhat smaller and more densely packed neurons than in other areas. From such slight regional differences in appearance, early investigators such as Although Brodmann's subdivisions of human and other brains are commonly portrayed in textbooks today, many of his proposed areas and proposed homologies have little validity. Fortunately, modern methods allow us to compare many features of cortical biology in great detail, including connection patterns, neuron-response properties, and cortical histochemistry, which allows us to identify cortical areas and evaluate homologies with a high degree of assurance. From these methods, we can conclude that the neocortex of early mammals was subdivided into a small number of functionally distinct areas, on the order of 10-20, and these areas have been retained in most lines of descent.The neocortex of North American opossums More rostrally, the frontal cortex of opossums is very small and does not contain any obvious motor areas. Instead, motor-related information from the cerebellum is relayed to S1. However, opossums are marsupials ( From this ancestral pattern, a great variety of brain organizations have evolved through alterations in size and the number of parts and the connections within and between parts (Kaas, 2007a). Consider, for example, the variations of the primary somatosensory cortex. The duck-billed platypus devotes most of S1 to representing tactile receptors of its highly sensitive bill, and it has added inputs from electroreceptors. The starnosed mole devotes most of S1 to its long, fl eshy nose appendages, rats mostly activate S1 with their facial whiskers, and human S1 has a large representation of the hand, lips, and mouth. In addition, the amount of neocortex varies greatly across species of mammals The number of sensory areas increased independently in several lines of evolution. For example, both cats and monkeys have a large number of visual areas, but the carnivore and primate lines appear to have acquired most of these areas independently rather than from a common ancestor. Thus, many of the visual areas in cats have no homologies in monkeys or humans. A similar situation holds for other regions of the brain. New areas were added, most commonly to sensory and motor regions of cortex rather than to multisensory "association" cortex as once thought. With new cortical areas, new connections between areas and subcortical structures emerged. Thus, mammals in various lines of descent evolved new cortical areas and connections, as well as other many specializations of previously existing ones. As a longrecognized example of the emergence of a new brain feature, the corpus callosum, the major pathway interconnecting the neocortex of the two cerebral hemispheres, is a derived character of placental mammals, having emerged in the ancestors of placentals after they diverged from marsupials. Whereas connections between the two hemispheres are mediated by the anterior commissure in marsupials and monotremes, most of these connections are carried in the shorter, more direct callosal pathway in placental mammals.Early primates emerged from small-brained, nocturnal, insect-eating mammals some 60 to 70 million years ago and soon branched into three main lines leading to present-day prosimians, tarsiers, and anthropoids ( The earliest primates are thought to have been small-bodied, nocturnal visual predators living on insects and small vertebrates, as well as fruit. They adapted to the tropical rainforests by emphasizing vision and visually guided reaching and grasping. American opossums. Somatosensory areas include the primary area (S1), a secondary area (S2), a parietal ventral area (PV), and caudal (SC) and rostral (SR) somatosensory belts. The auditory cortex (AUD) is limited and likely contains a primary fi eld (A1) and possibly another area or two. The visual cortex includes primary (V1) and secondary (V2) areas and a visual (Vis) belt. The caudotemporal (ct) fi eld is probably visual. In V1, the upper visual fi eld (uf) is represented caudal to the lower visual fi eld (lf). Modifi ed from This involved having larger, forward-facing eyes, opposable big toes and thumbs, and digits tipped with nails. These primates produced the largely nocturnal strepsirhine radiation with its varied forms, including some species now living in Madagascar that have become diurnal. The haplorine primates emerged about 60 million years ago in association with a shift from nocturnal to diurnal life, together with an increased emphasis on fruit eating third cone type, enabling full trichromatic vision, appears to have evolved independently in the ancestors of Old World anthropoids and in several New World monkey groups. The enhancements of color vision in the anthropoids are plausibly regarded as adaptations for distinguishing ripe, edible fruits. The shift to diurnality was also marked by larger social groupings, which may offer enhanced protection from predation. These changes were accompanied by increased brain size, including increases in the temporal lobe visual region, and in regions of the parietal and frontal cortex mediating motor control and social interactions.The ancestors of present-day tarsiers evidently abandoned the diurnal niche to become nocturnal visual predators again. Tarsiers retain a fovea, but they have a rod-dominated retina and their enormous eyes are sensitive at low light levels without the aid of a refl ecting tapetum. The primary visual cortex became very large relative to the rest of the brain and is extremely well differentiated, with a multiplicity of layers and sublayers In Africa, early anthropoids diverged some 25 to 30 million years ago into lines leading to modern Old World monkeys and to apes. At fi rst, apes were the most successful radiation, coming to occupy a range of rainforest and open woodland environments, whereas monkeys were quite rare. Perhaps as many as 30 different types of apes existed at one time. This condition changed radically some 10 million years ago when monkeys became abundant and apes rare. This change may have resulted from the advent of a more seasonably variable and drier climate. Ancestral Old World monkeys acquired specialized teeth suited to a leaf and fruit diet in drier climates. Also, the more rapid reproduction of monkeys may have made them more resistant to extinction than apes.Some 5 or 6 million years ago, a line of apes diverged into two branches: one that gave rise to modern common chimpanzees and bonobos (pygmy chimpanzees), and a second branch that led to the group of bipedal apes, the "hominins," that includes modern humans The oldest known hominins, the so-called australopithecines, date back at least 4 million years. These early hominins were bipedal, but skeletal traits suggest they retained considerable ability for climbing trees. Body size was rather small and males were much bigger than females. The brain was only slightly larger than for apes of similar body size. Hominin traits may have emerged as adaptations to a drier environment with grassland and savanna.Early australopithecines soon gave rise to a number of species differing in body size and limb proportions, as well as in characteristics of the jaws and teeth and brain size. Primitive members of our own genus began to emerge some 2 million years ago with Homo habilis (or "handy man," due to its use of stone tools). Homo habilis had a slightly increased cranial capacity compared to australopithecines, reduced face and teeth, and pelvic modifi cations for improved bipedal locomotion and the birth of neonates with larger heads. About 1.7 million years ago, H. habilis appears to have been replaced by H. erectus, a larger hominin with a further reduction in face and teeth and a larger brain. Shortly thereafter, Homo erectus spread out of Africa to central Asia. Homo sapiens emerged from an African population of H. erectus some 250,000 to 300,000 years ago. Other members of the genus Homo coexisted with Homo sapiens until as recently as 35,000 years ago, notably the Neanderthals, who adapted to a colder Europe and southwest Asia over 130,000 years ago. They disappeared and were replaced by modern H. sapiens some 35,000 years ago. Neanderthals were shorter and more heavily built than modern humans, but had a comparable or slightly larger cranial capacity. Over the last 15,000 years, some populations of humans have become smaller and have reduced their brain size, possibly as a result of a poorer diet as agriculture replaced hunting and gathering.Chimpanzees and bonobos (also misleadingly known as "pygmy chimpanzees") appear to be our closest surviving relatives. Humans and chimpanzees are 98 to 99% similar in the coding sequences of genes,This page intentionally left blank C H A P T E R