involved in asymmetric cell divisions work similarly in vertebrates. mInsc is the mammalian homologue of Insc and ASG3 is the mammalian homolog of Pins. Interfering with the expression or function of these homologues leads to the loss of apicobasal spindle orientation in the mammalian nervous system, resulting in too many cells dividing in the horizontal plane. In the mouse retina this causes the production of large clones arising from neuroepithelial cells, which can be explained if these cells divide symmetrically to produce two progenitors rather than one. The mammalian homologue of Numb may also play a key role in the distinct fates of daughter cells, as knockout mice suggest that mNumb is essential for cortical neuroepithelial cells to remain in a progenitor state The orientation of division can thus have an important role in determining cell fate, though which specifi c fates, of course, depend on where and when these cells arise. Interestingly the environment plays a role in the orientation of cell division lineages, and recent studies in both insects and vertebrates have shown that extrinsic signals, perhaps coming from recently postmitotic cells, can infl uence the plane of cleavage of a neighboring progenitor. This is one mechanism by which the specifi c types of neuron may work through a feedback control mechanism to control the appropriate number of neurons of a particular type.The nervous system is composed of two main classes of cells: neurons and glia. In both vertebrates and invertebrates, the application of lineage tracers to individual progenitors often yields clones that contain both neurons and glia, suggesting that these two quite distinct cell types often are produced from a common progenitor, a "neuroglioblast."In Drosophila, intrinsic determinants of glial fate are expressed at an early stage in neuroglioblasts In the central nervous system of vertebrates, multipotent stem cells often give rise to glia such as oligodendrocytes, as well as neurons The Notch signaling pathway also plays an important role in gliogenesis. Transient activation of Notch promotes the differentiation of glia in the CNS. Activation of the Notch pathway suppresses the transcription of proneural bHLH transcription factors like Neurogenin 2, and unblocks the transcription of factors that are necessary for gliogenesis.Sensory neurons, which are by and large peripheral, do not arise from neuroectodermal regions that generate the CNS. With the exception of the eye, all sensory organs of the vertebrate are derived from sensory placodes and neural crest. A placode is a morphologically visible thickening of an epithelium that often subse-quently invaginates into the interior and transforms into a distinct tissue or organ Sensory neurons of the trunk are derived from the neural crest ( III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT skeletal tissue, melanocytes, sensory neurons, and glial cells (Schwann cells) of the peripheral nervous system, adrenergic and cholinergic neurons of the autonomic nervous system, and the endocrine chromaffi n cells of the adrenal medulla. Sensory neurons stay close to the neural tube where they aggregate in segmentally reiterated dorsal root ganglia. Long peripheral processes extend from the dorsal root ganglia toward the skin, muscles, and skeleton. Here, dendritic endings of sensory neurons interact with specialized, mesodermally derived support cells, forming small "corpuscles" that are tuned to a specifi c type of stimulus, including touch, vibration, stretch, temperature, and pain. Peripheral sensory neurons of pladodal origin also are associated with specialized nonneuronal support cells that mechanically anchor the sensory apparatus, provide the proper ionic environment for sensory transduction, and "tune" the receptor cell to a special stimulus.Classical embryological experiments in which parts of donor embryos were transplanted to different sites in host embryos indicated that as they invaginate, placodes come in contact with the neural tube, the archenteron, the mesoderm, and the epidermal ectoderm. These structures all have inductive capacities and infl uence the fate of the pladodal cells. In some instances, specifi c signaling molecules have been identifi ed. For example, BMP4 and BMP7, secreted by the pharyngeal endoderm, are involved in the induction the epibranchial placodes; and FGF3 and Wnt8c from the hindbrain and FGF19 from the axial mesoderm work together to induce the otic placode ( Let us follow the determination of sensory cells of the inner ear. Following invagination from the dorsal ectoderm, the otic placode forms a hollow vesicle, the otocyst ( As the inner ear takes shape, the cells that form the octocyst wall diversify. In the same way that we learned about for the neural tube, different cell types delaminate from the epithelium and form additional layers basally adjacent to the epithelium ( The domain of the otocyst that produces sensory neurons expresses the proneural gene Ath1, as well as signals of the Notch pathway, which suggests that a lateral inhibition mechanism is active to control the number of neural precursors that form at any given time. Notch activity is also required in the epithelial layer of the otocyst to distinguish between hair cells and support cells. Thus, precursors of hair cells appear at regular intervals, separated by support cell precursors ( Homologues of most of the molecules involved in specifi cation of peripheral sensory neurons also operate in the Drosophila sensory system. Indeed, molecular evidence shows that the proteins encoded by the pax, eya, and six genes form complexes that as a whole unit bind to DNA and regulates transcription. Genes that in this manner encode cooperating proteins are called gene networks. The fact that their function is dependent on all members of the complex explains why entire gene networks often are conserved throughout evolution. The pax/six/eya network, activated by BMP and/or Wnt signals, is one of the best-studied examples of such a conserved gene network.In Drosophila and many other invertebrates, sensory organs are comprised of small clusters of sensory neurons and support cells, which together are called sensilla ( In most cases, all cells of a sensillum are born in three consecutive divisions. The SOP, also called the primary precusor cell or pI, divides into two pII daughters called pIIa and pIIb 15. CELLULAR DETERMINATION III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT sequence of events to the individual daughter cells play an important role. Several determinants of sensillum cell fate have been identifi ed in genetic screens. Most of them have to do with the Notch signaling pathway, indicating that this signaling pathway is involved not only in selecting SOPs, and thereby determining the sensillum pattern, but also in differentiating sensory neurons and accessory cells. We will look at two examples of how regulation of the Notch pathway acts in the Drosophila sensillum lineage.The fi rst step in sensillum development, the determination of SOPs, is controlled in a manner similar to that regulating neuroblast determination. Thus, the expression of proneural genes of the AS-C defi nes proneural clusters in the ectoderm that are competent to form Once determined, SOPs divide asymmetrically. A crucial factor in generating this asymmetry is the protein Numb Asymmetric activation of the Notch pathway also regulates cell fate at later divisions in the sensillum lineage. For example, pIIa starts out with an activated Notch signaling pathway. As the division into trichogen and tormogen cell occurs, Notch becomes inhibited in the trichogen cell. Again, asymmetrically inherited Numb is an essential player in inhibiting Notch signaling. Numb appears in pIIa shortly before its mitosis and localizes to its anterior pole, whereby it ends up in the trichogen cell ( It is clear that recurring themes, such as spatially restricted homeobox containing transcription factors, proneural bHLH genes, asymmetric cell divisions, and Notch signaling, play a role in sensory neuron determination in vertebrates and invertebrates just as they do in the central nervous system of these animals.The retina is a sensory organ with different origins. The Drosophila retina arises from an imaginal disc, whereas the vertebrate retina arises from an outpocketing of the neural plate. Studies of how specifi c neurons arise and diversify in the retinas of these distinct animals reveals surprising similarities despite their very different embryological origins. These similarities may be due to the shared molecular evolution of visual organs that predates the separation of vertebrates and invertebrates.The insect compound eye is built of a large number of identical facets, called ommatidia. Drosophila possesses approximately 800 ommatidia in each eye. Each contains several different types of photoreceptors and accessory cells. There are eight identifi ably unique photoreceptors in each ommatidium; six of them (R1-R6) form an outer trapezoidal array, whereas two (R7 and R8) are located in the center Cells of the ommatidia are formed from clonally unrelated, uncommitted precursor cells that are generated from the proliferation of cells in the eye imaginal disc behind the wave front, which is visible as a depression in the disc called the "morphogenetic furrow" (MF), cells are mostly postmitotic and are beginning to differentiate. As they leave the MF, cells of the eye disc become arranged in a pattern of "rosettes" that foreshadow the regular ommatidial pattern. Soon afterward, one cell, which will become the R8 photoreceptor, is singled out in each rosette. Being the fi rst cells to differentiate, R8 cells can be considered as "crystallization centers" around which the other ommatidial cells aggregate in a stereotyped pattern.R8 cells express the proneural gene atonal (ato). Atonal is turned on by the signaling protein Hedgehog (Hh, a homologue of vertebrate Sonic hedgehog, Shh). Atonal turns on in a continuous band of cells within the morphogenetic furrow and initiates a lateral inhibition through Delta Notch signaling Shortly following its own determination, R8 puts out signals that activate two different signaling pathways: Notch and Ras. The Notch pathway, as we know, is activated by Delta. The Ras pathway represents a highly conserved biochemical cascade of cytoplasmic kinases (Ras, The way in which differential signaling pathway activation controls ommatidial cell fates has been studied most closely for two cell types, R7 and the cone cells, which appear at a relatively late stage when all other photoreceptors are already in place. The Pax-2 gene specifi es cone cells The determination of the R7 cell deserves special mention in view of the pivotal role it has played in opening up the molecular-genetic study of signaling pathways In several follow-up screens, many signal transducing molecules and transcription factors activated by the Sev receptor were identifi ed. Among them were the Drosophila homologues of Ras, Raf, and MAPK. One of the most rewarding fi ndings was the identifi cation of the signal that binds to Sev. Given the widespread expression of Sev, it was clear that a signal emanating from a point source must exist, in order to ensure that Sev would become active only in one cell. The logical candidate to emit such signal would be R8, the only cell in broad contact with the presumptive R7.A genetic screen for R7-less fl ies yielded identifi cation of a membrane bound signaling molecule, called Bride of sevenless (Boss), which is expressed specifi cally in R8 cells and serves as the ligand for Sev. These experiments provided an impressive demonstration of the awesome power of genetic screens combined with precise knowledge of the developing system in identifying new genes and proteins controlling development.The vertebrate retina, like the Drosophila retina, develops from a population of pluripotent neuroepithelial progenitors, which produce a diversity of neurons and glia ( There is an intrinsic element to the succession of cellular fates in the vertebrate retina What could these feedback signals be? RGCs express Shh, and the Shh knockout mouse contains increased number of RGCs. These results suggest that Shh provides feedback inhibition signal in the developing mouse retina, echoing what happens in the Drosophila retina where R8 cells express Hh, which regulates the expression of ato. The growth differentiation factor 11 (GDF11) is another factor secreted by RGCs, and it acts by limiting the temporal window during which progenitors are competent to express ath5 and thus produce RGCs. Finally, as in the Drosophila retina, the Notch signaling pathway contributes to retinal diversity in the vertebrate retina signaling is compromised in early retinal progenitors, too many cells differentiate as early cell types such as RGCs and cone photoreceptors, whereas later interference with Notch signaling leads to an increase in laterborn cell types such as rod cells. When cells are released from the inhibition mediated by the Notch pathway, proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, such as ath5, bias cells towards particular fates, such as RGCs. The Notch signaling pathway, by allowing only a certain number of cells to differentiate at any one time, is thus important in creating cellular diversity in the vertebrate retina The most ventral part of the vertebrate spinal cord is the "fl oor plate" and just dorsal to this are the motor neurons ( How do cells at different dorso-ventral levels interpret their exposure to different levels Shh to acquire different fates? Threshold levels of Shh turn on some homeobox genes such as Nkx2.2 and Nkx6.1 (Class II) and turn off others such as Pax6 and Dbx2 (Class I). Thus neural tube neurons in different dorso-ventral regions express specifi c homeodomain proteins, which either are turned on or off at particular Shh thresholds ( Motor neurons in the spinal cord are organized in columns that project to muscle groups along the anterior to posterior axis of the body Motor columns are subdivided into classes that innervate different groups of muscles. Transcription factors of the LIM homeodomain (LIM-HD) family are involved in this further specifi cation, as motor neurons expressing different combinations of LIM-HD factors such as Islet-1, Islet-2, and Lim-3 are expressed in different motor neuron classes that innervate different groups muscles. This is particularly well illustrated in the primary motor neurons (Rop, Mip, and Cap) of zebrafi sh, which can easily be distinguished by their relative rostral to caudal position in each spinal segment as well as their axon trajectories to distinct muscle regions. These three neurons express different combinations of LIM transcription factors. The identity of these neurons, as judged by their projection to different muscle regions, is infl uenced by the position in which they develop. These projection patterns can therefore be changed by transplantation in which the position of these neurons is changed prior to axonon-genesis. Transplantations that lead to such switches in projection correlate with induced changes in LIM-HD code suggesting a causal link.Motor neurons that innervate specifi c muscles are grouped into motor pools, which distinguished by the expression of distinct members of the ETS family of transcription factors. For example the ETS gene ER81 is expressed in the motor neurons that innervate the limb adductor muscle in chicks, whereas the iliotrochanter motor neurons express the PEA3 ETS gene Recent work suggests that these ETS genes regulate the expression of cell adhesion and axon guidance factors that help motor neurons recognize their target. Interestingly, the sensory afferents that innervate the stretch receptors, in particular muscle, express the same ETS gene as the motor neurons that innervate that muscle, and this helps the sensory neuron axons fi nd the dendrites of these motor neurons completing the monosynaptic stretch refl ex.The motor neuron system of the Drosophila larva, responsible for crawling, is relatively simple and has a reproducible segmental organization located in the ventral nerve cord of the larva As in the vertebrate, combinatorial codes specify different motor neuronal types. In Drosophila, this subdivision works down to the level of single cells. The fi rst subdivision in Drosophila is between ventral projecting motor neurons, vMNs, and dorsal projecting motor neurons, dMNs. Interesting vMN identity is controlled by the combinatorial action of the Nkx6 and HB9 homeobox genes, a similar combination to that used to specify motor neurons in vertebrates. The vMNs in Drosophila, like the motor neurons in vertebrates, are specifi ed into subclasses that project along specifi c nerves to innervate specifi c muscles by the further expression of combinatorial codes of LIM-HD factors, just as in vertebrates What aspects of neuronal phenotype do these combinatorial codes of transcription factors control? Islet and Lim3 are two transcription factors expressed in a particular subclass of motor neuron that sends axons out the transverse nerve. When either of these genes is lost, the axons of these motor neurons defasciculate, leading to the failure of transverse nerve formation. These motor neurons all express a specifi c immunoglobulin-containing cell-adhesion molecule called Beat-1c, and the beat-ic gene is likely a direct target of these transcription factors. The defasciculation observed in islet and Lim3 mutants can be rescued by the forced expression of Beat-1c in these motor neurons, strongly suggesting that the combinatorial code in Drosophila motor neurons, like that in the vertebrate motor neurons, regulates cell adhesion factors that help motor neurons navigate to their targets.The cerebral cortex of mammals is the neural tissue where the conscious processing of information occurs. So, it is natural to want to know about the various neuronal types here and how they arise. Neuroepithelial cells in anterior-dorsal region of neural tube divide extensively to cause the ballooning out of two telencephalic vesicles. Further proliferation eventually produces an enormous folded sheet of tissue (about 4 mm thick and about 1.6 m 2 in area when unfolded in humans) that forms the cerebral cortex. The neocortex, which forms most of the cerebral cortex in humans, is a six-layered structure, with each layer having its own particular array of neuronal cell types. Differences in the thicknesses and cellular densities of particular layers have enabled histologists to distinguish as many as 100 cytoarchitectonically distinct cortical areas in humans. Most neocortical cells and all glutamatergic ones originate from neuroepithelial cells at the apical surface or ventricular zone of the telencephalic vesicles. Asymmetric divisions of these cells generate one daughter that remains neuroepithelial and apical, and another daughter that migrates basally. Most of the time, the migrating daughter becomes a postmitotic cortical neuron, but in some of cases and increasing as development proceeds, the migrating daughter travels only a short distance to the subventricular zone, where it divides symmetrically, generating two neurons.Cortical precursors, once generated, must then migrate basally away from the ventricular and subventricular zones, through an intermediate zone that will later be fi lled with axons, until they arrive at the cortical plate where they stop migrating and begin to differentiate into an enormous variety of specialized cortical cell types. This basal migration is coupled with an inside-out pattern of histogenesis in which the fi rstborn cells take up the deep layers of the cortical plate and the later born cells migrate past the earlier generated neurons to occupy more superfi cial layers Important questions about neural stem cells in the adult brain abound. Why do these cells remain undifferentiated and capable of division when their neighbors have exited the cell cycle and differentiated? What signals do these cells need in order to stimulate their proliferation and differentiation? How can their differentiation toward particular types of neurons or glia be controlled experimentally? Although there is much speculation on the role of various signaling and growth factors in regulating these processes, more work needs to be done to identify the molecules that prevent stem cells from differentiating and the signals that release their potential.Interestingly, the environment of the organism may play a key role regulating NSCs. Rats raised in complex environments containing toys and exercise wheels show more proliferation and survival of hippocampal stem cells than rats raised in simple cages. Stress works in the other direction and seems to inhibit stem cell proliferation and survival in the hippocampus. The identifi cation of the intrinsic regulatory factors that regulate these NSC activities might prove invaluable in treating neural or glial degenerative conditions without the need for transplants.Another source of stem cells in mammals is the inner cell mass of the early conceptus. These are the cells that give rise to all the tissues of the embryo proper Various laboratories are trying to turn ESCs into various types of neurons. As a great deal is known about the inductive signals that are critical to the generation of motor neurons in the vertebrate spinal cord, it may be asked whether this knowledge can be used to direct stem cells to a motor neuron fate. Jessell and colleagues Clearly, the more we know about neuronal determination, the more likely we will be able to direct stem cells down appropriate developmental pathways that will be useful in treating the damaged nervous system. CELLS OF THE CEREBRAL CORTEX the cell cycle These fi ndings demonstrate a relationship between the cell cycle exit and cell determination in the cortex reminiscent of what was described earlier in this chapter for the Drosophila CNS and the vertebrate retina, and provide a plausible mechanism for how cytoarchitectonic differences in cortical lamination can be achieved simply by altering cell cycle kinetics in a regionally specifi c way. Thalamic afferents that innervate the cortex may have a role in this, as the invading axons release trophic factors that promote proliferation. Thus, different regions of the cortex could have differences in the number of cells in specifi c layers, due to the timing and density of the innervation that they receive.Not all cells in the neocortex originate from local ventricular zone. The oligodendrocytes and many classes of GABAergic interneurons migrate from more ventral part of the telencephalic vesicles, the ganglionic eminences The generation of neurons involves a variety of extrinsic signals and intrinsic transcription factors that confer individual identities on postmitotic neurons. Whether vertebrate or invertebrate, this process of determination involves a similar set of molecular and cellular mechanisms, such as regional and temporal identity genes, proneural genes, signaling molecules and receptors, the Notch pathway, and asymmetric cell division. All these conspire, over the course of neuronal generation, to create progenitors with distinct combinations of transcription factors that uniquely specify the fates of the differentiating neurons down by regulating the expression of genes that affect specifi c features of the cell such as axon and dendrite growth and targeting, the topics of Chapters 17, 18 and 21.regulate hair cell development in the mammalian inner ear. Development 132, One of the remarkable features of the developing nervous system is the wide-ranging migration of precursor cells. Over the past decade, genetic studies in invertebrate and live imaging of vertebrates have given insights into the mechanisms responsible for neuronal motility. In particular, signal pathways have been identifi ed that initiate cell movements and govern the dynamics of cell motility. A conserved family of polarity protein complexes, and their signaling pathways, orient the mitotic spindle in dividing precursor cells during neurogenesis, and induce postmitotic progenitor cell to the extend motile protrusions, driven by actin poly merization dynamics and stabilized by adhering to adjacent cells or to the extracellular matrix (ECM) via transmembrane receptors linked to the actin cytoskeleton. The molecular nature of the cues guiding cell movement are only beginning to be understood and appear to differ between different regions of the nervous system. This chapter compares the strategies used to generate fi nal cell pattern in the peripheral and central nervous systems, considering classical views of brain development that resulted from anatomical studies, as well as emerging molecular programs of neurogenesis and cell migration that have resulted from genetic and molecular genetic studies.In the late nineteenth century, the Swiss histologist Wilhelm His The idea that CNS neurogenesis occurs in the thin epithelium of the embryonic brain vesicles became apparent when Fred and Mary Sauer showed that cells in the neuroepithelium contain different amounts of DNA, with diploid cells located on the ventricular surface The polarization of the epithelium of the neural tube depends on the formation of adhesion junctions between cells During neuroblast division in ventricular zones, the microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) nucleates astral microtubules required for spindle orientation. Cdc42 is a master polarity regulator from yeast to humans. Cdc42, aPKC, and dynein/dynactin activity control spindle orientation and govern symmetric versus asymmetric patterns of neuroblast division The neurons of both the peripheral and central nervous systems originate from the neural tube and the folds of the neural tube. The cells of the PNS are generated fi rst, as they delaminate in a specialized region of the dorsal aspect of the neural tube called the neural crest. Neural crest neuroblasts migrate out into the developing nonneuronal tissues, where they will form the axon tracts of the periphery, as the progenitors of the CNS are beginning to establish the regions of the brain and spinal cord that will receive the sensory information from the PNS and establish brain circuitry. We will therefore discuss neurogenesis and migration in the peripheral nervous system fi rst, followed by patterns of neurogenesis and migration that establish the CNS.The neural crest is a transient population of cells, so named because they arise on the "crest" of the closing neural tube. This cell population is unique to vertebrates and forms most of the peripheral nervous system (PNS). Neural crest cells migrate extensively along characteristic pathways and give rise to diverse and numerous derivatives. All the dorsal root, sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric ganglia are derived from neural crest cells. Furthermore, most cranial sensory ganglia receive a contribution from the neural crest, with the remaining cells derived from ectodermal placodes. In addition to forming neurons and glia of the peripheral nervous system, neural crest cells form melanocytes, cranial cartilage, and adrenal chromaffi n cells. This wide variety of cell types arises from precursors in the neural folds and neural tube that are multipotent and have stem cell properties The neural crest originates at the border between the neural plate and the nonneural ectoderm by an inductive interaction between these two tissues As they change from epithelial to migratory mesenchymal cells, neural crest cells undergo changes in adhesive properties. While within the neuroepithelium, neural tube cells express high levels of the cell adhesion molecules N-cadherin and cadherin. Migrating cells down-regulate these cadherins during migration and up-regulate cadherin-7. Upon coalescing into ganglia and ceasing migration, cadherin-7 is downregulated and N-cadherin-6b are again up-regulated After leaving the neural tube, neural crest cells encounter extracellular spaces that are rich in extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules, such as fi bronectin, laminin, collagens, and proteoglycans. These may serve as a good migratory substrate and, indeed, the neural crest cell surface has abundant integrin receptors that mediate adhesion to ECM molecules. Furthermore, antibodies to the β 1 subunit of integrin cause severe perturbations in neural crest development in the head. They appear to prevent the migration of some neural crest cells from the cranial neural tube. In the trunk, function-blocking antibodies that interfere with the a 4 subunit of integrin cause defects in neural crest cell movement, but fail to alter the segmental pattern of migration through the somites. These results suggest that perturbing integrin function alters the properties of migratory cells, but not their overall metameric pattern of migration. Thus, cell-matrix interactions may play a permissive role in the migration of neural crest cells through the somites, but cannot play an instructive role in directing the precise patterns or pathways for crest cell migration.When neural crest cells emerge from the neural tube, they fi rst enter a cell-free space in which they are easily identifi able ( To circumvent this problem, LeDouarin took advantage of the ability to perform grafts between related species of birds, such that the grafted cells were indelibly marked ( III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT host chick embryo by staining for condensed heterochromatin, which characterizes the quail but not chick cells.More recently, this technique has been facilitated greatly by the advent of quail-specifi c antibodies. Use of the chick-quail marking system made it possible to demonstrate that neural crest cell populations originating from different axial levels follow distinct migratory pathways and give rise to different progeny once they reach their destinations. In addition to grafting experiments, antibodies that recognize neural crest cells, such as HNK-1 and NC-1 antibodies, made it possible to identify early migrating neural crest cells without the necessity of performing microsurgery. The exclusive use of neural crest antibodies has several pitfalls because these antibodies are neither entirely specifi c nor stain the full complement of neural crest cells. However, they do provide important confi rmatory information about the pathways followed by neural crest cells. More recently, a number of other molecular markers for early neural crest populations have become available. These include the cell adhesion molecule cadherin-6b and the transcription factor Slug, expressed in the neural folds and neural crest cells during early stages of migration and Sox10, expressed in early migrating neural crest cells and later in neural crest-derived glia. One problem with using antibodies or molecular markers to follow cell migratory patterns is that these do not represent true lineage markers. Shifts in their expression patterns could just as easily refl ect up-or down-regulation of these molecules as changes in cell position. Therefore, approaches for labeling small groups as well as large populations of neural crest cells have been employed to follow individual cell movements and interactions within the population. One successful approach has been to inject the lipophilic vital dye DiI or electroporating GPF constructs into the neural tube or neural folds. Because the dye is hydrophobic and lipophilic, it intercalates into all cell membranes that it contacts. Injection into the neural tube marks all neural tube cells, including presumptive neural crest cells, within its dorsal aspect. Because the time and location of injection can be controlled, this provides a direct approach for following migratory pathways. When dye injections are made focally into neural folds, this technique can be used to label very small numbers of cells. It has the further advantage of being applicable to almost all vertebrates. A disadvantage, however, is that the dye becomes diluted with each cell division and, therefore, is not useful for examining the longterm differentiation of neural crest derivatives.Because most studies of cell migration in vivo look only at the beginning and end point, little is known about the dynamics of neural crest cell movement. Advances in imaging technologies have made it possible to acquire more refi ned images in ovo. Time-lapse movies of cranial neural crest migration can be generated by injecting DiI into the lumen of the chick neural tube, and high-resolution confocal images can be made of the labeled cells over time ( A number of different methods have proved useful for following the pathways of neural crest migration, including neural tube transplantations, vital dye labeling, and antibody staining. These have made it possible not only to establish the various routes of neural crest migration occurring at different axial levels, but also to follow the derivatives of neural crest cells arising from distinct locations.Despite differences in the nature of the techniques involved, quail/chick chimeras, molecular markers, and cell labeling have provided similar pictures of the migratory pathways followed by neural crest cells. These migratory pathways and the derivatives formed by neural crest cells are regionalized according to their original position along the anterior/posterior axis, such that cells from a given axial level give rise to a characteristic array of progeny and follow distinct pathways from those arising at other axial levels At cranial levels, some neural crest cells contribute to the cranial sensory ganglia and the parasympathetic ciliary ganglion of the eye, whereas others migrate ventrally to form many of the cartilaginous elements of the facial skeleton. One of the interesting things about neural crest-derived bones of the head is that these are the only skeletal elements in the body that are derived from ectoderm. Precise quail/chick grafting experiments have determined the regions of neural tube from which neural crest cells arise to contribute to cartilaginous elements and cranial ganglia Vagal neural crest cells migrate long distances to form the enteric nervous system, which also receives a contribution from the lumbosacral neural crest. Within the gut, the earliest generated crest cells move as a wave from anterior to posterior to populate the bowel, which they appear to populate in sequence such that the anterior portions are populated by neural crest cells fi rst and the cells move to progressively more posterior sites. Mice bearing a "lethal spotted" mutation lack neural crest cells in a portion of their bowel. This leads to a lack of innervation in the region called aganglionic bowel. As a consequence, food waste fails to move through this portion of the bowel, leading to a disorder called "mega-colon." A similar defect is observed in humans leading to Hirschsprung's disease. One cause of this disorder is from a defect in molecules called endothelins and their receptors. The failure of neural crest migration in the aganglionic bowel of lethal spotted mutant mice is caused by a defect in mesenchymal components of the gut, whereas the neural crest cells themselves are normal.Trunk neural crest cells follow two primary migratory pathways Cells following the dorsolateral stream give rise to melanocytes. Those cells following the ventral pathway give rise to the peripheral nervous system of the trunk, including the chain of sympathetic ganglia and dorsal root ganglia, as well as chromaffi n cells of the adrenal medulla. In addition to these neurons, these cells generate glia of the peripheral ganglia and Schwann cells that ensheathe and myelinate peripheral axons.The neural crest can be subdivided into specifi c subpopulations based upon their level of origin along the neural tube. Different populations follow different migratory pathways and form characteristic types of derivatives. For example, cranial bone and cartilage only arise from the cranial neural crest.Neural crest cells that arise and migrate at different axial levels assume different fates. Thus, it is possible that they are specifi ed at early times to take on particu- On the left is a chick embryo viewed shortly after unilateral ablation of the neural folds of roughly half the neural tube at the level of the presumptive midbrain. A spot of DiO (green) was focally injected into the remaining neural tube, and DiI (red) was injected into the bordering intact neural folds. On the right, the same embryo after 48 h of further development. Cells that were originally in the neural tube had dispersed as migratory neural crest cells from both the green-and the red-labeled spots. (B-D) Different views of time-lapse movies of embryos in which the neural tube and premigratory neural crest cells were labeled with DiI. (B) Two views of the same embryo immediately after DiI labeling (left) and several hours after neural crest migration from the hindbrain.      ingly, BMP-7 is present in the dorsal aorta adjacent to the location where trunk neural crest cells differentiate into sympathetic neurons. Similarly, glucocorticoids are produced by the adrenal cortex, which surrounds the adrenal medullary cells.In addition to specifi c growth factors, the timing of emigration may play an important role in eventual neural crest cell fate decisions. Neural crest cells exhibit an orderly pattern in the timing of migration, with cells initially following the ventral pathway and later contributing to progressively more dorsal derivatives. Although early and late migrating cranial neural crest cells appear to have a similar developmental potential, it is likely that the cell population does undergo a change in the range of fates that the cells can assume. For example, the last emigrating trunk neural crest cells in the bird give rise to pigment cells and appear to have a limited capacity to form sympathetic neurons. However, stem cells appear to persist in the neural tube and retain the potential to form neural crest. Well past the normal time of neural crest cell emigration, cells with the full range of neural crest potential can be isolated from various neural crest derivatives Neural crest cells are somewhat plastic with respect to their prospective fates. When put into a new environment, they sometimes behave according to their new location. However, some cells act according to their original location and thus have some "intrinsic" information. With time, the developmental potential of neural crest populations becomes restricted, although a subpopulation of "stem cells" may remain until late stages.A hallmark of the developing peripheral nervous system is its inherent segmentation. After neural crest cells migrate from the neural tube and through the somites, they condense to form segmentally arranged sensory and sympathetic ganglia. For each somite, a single sensory and sympathetic ganglion forms. This exquisite and reproducible pattern suggests the presence of some inherent segmental information in the embryo that is responsible for segmental migration and gangliogenesis of neural crest cells. In longitudinal sections through early embryos, it is clear that neural crest cells migrate in a metameric pattern, moving exclusively through the rostral half of each somite while failing to enter the caudal half ( Such a segmental pattern of migration could be caused by inherent cues within the neural tube that direct neural crest cells to migrate segmentally. Alternatively, tissues through which neural crest cells migrate may contain patterning information that results in segmental migration. The relationship between neural crest cells and their surrounding tissues has been explored by manipulating the neural tube and/or somites in a series of grafting experiments. Removal of the somites results in the formation of huge, unsegmented neural crest-derived ganglia, suggesting that somites are necessary for the segmental migration of neural crest cells. However, inversion of the segmental plate in the rostrocaudal dimension reverses the pattern of neural crest migration, such that neural crest cells migrate through the half of the rotated sclerotomes that was originally rostral but is now caudal. Motor axons, which also traverse the rostral sclerotome in normal animals, exhibit similar behavior to neural crest cells after segmental plate rotation. This suggests that the information necessary to guide neural crest cells and motor axons is intrinsic to the somites. Furthermore, these experiments show that the rostrocaudal polarity of the somites is already established at the segmental plate stage.Other experimental manipulations demonstrate that the caudal half of each somite is inhibitory whereas the rostral half somite is permissive for neural crest migration and motor axon guidance. If somites are constructed to contain only caudal sclerotome tissue, neural crest cells and motor axons fail to migrate altogether. Conversely, an all-rostral somite results in the absence of segmentation for both neural crest cells and motor axons. Taken together, these fi ndings demonstrate that the segmental migration of both neural crest cells and motor axons is due to cues inherent in the somite. These cues may be caused by attractive cues in the rostral-half sclerotome, inhibitory cues in the caudal-half sclerotome, or a combination of both. The fi nding that somites containing all caudal-half sclerotomes cannot support neural crest migration strongly suggests that some of the guidance cues are inhibitory. This segmentally arranged streams of migrating neural crest cells, in turn results in the segmental organization of the neural crest-derived ganglia of the peripheral nervous system.Although it was suggested that Eph/ephrin signaling might direct the pattern of trunk neural crest migration As in the trunk, the migration of neural crest cells in the hindbrain is also segmented. Three broad streams of migrating cells are found adjacent to rhombomere 2 (r2), r4, and r6, whereas no neural crest cells are apparent adjacent to r3 and r5. Focal injections of DiI at the levels of r3 and r5 have demonstrated that both of these rhombomeres generate neural crest cells and that the apparent segmental pattern results from the DiI-labeled cells that originated in r3 and r5 deviating  Trunk neural crest cells move in a segmental pattern, which is controlled by inhibitory molecules present in the caudal-half of each somite. Neural crest cells have Neuropilin-2 receptors on their surface. When they encounter Sempahorin 3F ligands in the caudal somite, they are diverted from this location, leading to selective migration through only the rostral-half somite.Neural crest cells exhibit an orderly pattern in their migration. Whereas the fi rst cells to migrate tend to move most ventrally, later migratory cells contribute to progressively more dorsal derivatives. The different destinations of neural crest derivatives are therefore populated in a sequential order during development. One possibility is that the early migrating cells "fi ll" the more ventral sites, effectively clogging up the pathway. Alternatively, the sites themselves may change with time so that they can no longer support migration.Surprisingly little is known about how neural crest cells know that they have reached the appropriate destination and stop their migration. This is in marked contrast to the developing CNS, where a number of mutations affect the ability of neuroblasts to cease migrating. It is clear that cell adhesion molecules such as N-cadherin and N-CAM are up-regulated after cells reach their fi nal sites and condense to form peripheral ganglia. However, there is no evidence for a causal role for cell adhesion molecules in this process.Some of the factors and signaling cascades that result in neurogenesis in the developing PNS are beginning to be understood (see Chapter 15). Many neur al crest cells appear to be multipotent and not yet committed to a neural fate. However, particular external factors can infl uence their fate decisions. For example, clonal populations of neural crest cells become neural in the presence of BMPs and glial in the presence of glial growth factor. Similarly, activation of Notch signaling promotes gliogenesis at the expense of neurogenesis in neural crest cells and their derivatives. Certain transcription factors may bias cells toward certain fates; for example, whereas mash-1 is essential for sympathetic neuron formation, neurogenins are essential for sensory fates An interesting contrast between the developing PNS and the CNS is that migrating neural crest cells proliferate rapidly as they move. In fact, even after exhibiting defi ned neuronal characteristics, some neural crest derivatives continue to divide. For example, in the developing sympathetic ganglia, neural crest-derived cells express neurotransmitters and other proteins characteristic of sympathetic neurons but remain actively mitotic. However, other neural crest cells such as sensory neurons appear to withdraw from the cell cycle well before they express neuronal traits.Neural crest cells migrate over long distances throughout the body to form diverse cell types, including neurons, glia, melanocytes, and cells of the adrenal gland. The migratory pathways of neural crest cells vary along the rostrocaudal body axis, and the local environments through which cells migrate and eventually differentiate play an important role in phenotypic specifi cation. The migration of neural crest cells is guided by both positive (attractive or permissive) and inhibitory (repulsive) cues that are found in the environment.In developing CNS, a series of complex cell movements organizes young neurons into a series of layers, or neuronal laminae. The relationship of neurogenesis to the formation of neural layers in developing cortex emerged from the pioneering work of Richard Sidman who discovered the technique of thymidine "birthdating" The discovery of directed neuronal migration along glial fi bers by Pasko Rakic in the 1970s The histogenesis of the cortex requires both directed migrations and the formation of two intermediate scaffolding zones, the preplate and the cortical plate. The preplate forms in the initial cell cycles of cortical neurogenesis (between embryonic days 11 and 12 in the mouse) and gradually transforms into the cortical plate. During the preplate stage, pioneer axons begin to extend from neurons within the preplate zone, and somatosensory and motor areas begin to emerge within the neocortex. The preplate contains cells that express specifi c markers and project axons along defi ned pathways As fi rst proposed by Shatz, in studies that demonstrated the critical role of the subplate in establishing cortical architectonics Detailed studies of the cell cycle by Takahashi and Caviness Within the neocortical VZ, one of the fi rst cells to express markers of differentiation is a specialized form of glial cell, called the radial glial cell. This cell, recognized by its expression of the RC2 antigen, extends long processes perpendicular to the ventricular surface toward the overlying cerebral wall, and continues to grow as the laminae develop such that it spans from the ventricular surface to the pial surface throughout development As development proceeds, rapid cell division thickens the proliferative zone, and several layers of cells develop above the neuroepithelium. The fi rst step in this process is the creation of the marginal zone (M), a cell-sparse zone from which nuclei are apparently excluded during interkinetic movements in the epithelium. Second, a zone of growing, afferent axons appears, forming an intermediate zone (I) between the VZ and the marginal zone ( Imaging of dye-labeled cells in slices of embryonic cortex reveals extensive movements of the neuroblasts within the neuroepithelium. Labeled cells move intermittently within the plane of the epithelium at speeds between 10 and 100 mm/h Neuronal motility in the developing CNS, like that of all metazoan cells, occurs in response to a migrationpromoting signal(s), which polarizes the cell and induce the extension of protrusions in the direction of migration A number of labs have provided evidence that the small GTPase Cdc42, and homologs of the C. elegans polarity signaling complex Par6, orient   G. Magini used Golgi impregnation methods to visualize a system of glial fi bers that spanned the cortical wall. He proposed that the glial fi bers provided a scaffold for neuronal migration. (B) In the late twentieth century, Rakic and Sidman again used the Golgi impregnation method to map radial glial cells in the developing primate neocortex. As described later, they used EM to visualize the relationship of young neurons to the glial fi ber system. (C) Three-dimensional reconstruction of serial EM sections of a migrating neurons in the intermediate zone of the primate neocortex illustrate the cytology and neuron-glia relationships of migrating neurons in vivo. The cell soma of the migrating cell apposes to radial glial fi bers (striped vertical shafts, RF1-6), which extend short lamellate expansions (LE). Nuclei (N) of migrating neurons are elongated, and their leading processes (LP) are thicker and richer in organelles than their railing processes (TP). The lower part of the diagram depicts the numerous parallel axons of the optic radiations (OR). These axons have been deleted from the upper portion of the fi gure to reveal the radial glial fi bers. The leading process extends several pseudopodial endings (PS), which appear to explore the territory through which the neuron is migrating. In cross-section (a-d), a migrating neuron partially encircles the shaft of the radial glial fi ber. From Sidman and Actin polymerization in lamellipodia is mediated by the Arp2/3 complex, which binds to the sides or tip of a preexisting actin fi lament and induces the formation of a new daughter fi lament that branches off the mother fi lament. Activation of the Arp2/3 complex is localized by WASP/WAVE family members, which are also activated at the cell surface. During migration, an "elastic Brownian ratchet" mechanism, in which thermal energy bends nascent short actin fi laments, and pushes the membrane forward. Thus, unbending a growing axon fi lament against the leading edge of the cell provides a driving force for the motility of neural crest cells and extending axons. The local activation of the Arp2/3 complex, through downstream signaling events, induces lamellopodia to extend in a particular direction The binding of myosin II to the actin cytoskeleton regulates the contraction of the actin cytoskeleton, which transmits tensile force and moves the cell toward adhesion sites As neurons in the VZ of cortical regions of brain exit the cell cycle, polarity proteins and their signaling cascades establish the polarity of the young neuron and control the extension of a short leading process. As the post-mitotic cell delaminates from the epithelium, movement of the cell soma occurs by interkinetic nuclear movement To examine the role of polarity proteins in neuronal migration, The specifi c roles of dynein and microtubule contractions are being studied by a number of labs, as are the mechanisms that control signaling events that initiate the dissolution of the adhesion site via endocytosis of the neuron-glial adhesion ligands, including ASTN1/2 Radial glial cells are a transient population of cells that provide scaffolding for neuronal migration. The histologists Albert Kölliker and Wilhelm His described the development of glial cells in the late nineteenth century. The silver impregnation method, described earlier, played a crucial role in the detection of radial glial processes. The Italian anatomist Giuseppe Magini used Golgi's silver stain to visualize radial fi bers that extended from the ventricular epithelium to the surface of the neocortex or mammalian embryos ( Ramon y Cajal rejected Magini's theory of neuronal migration along glial fi bers, which discouraged further studies on glial guidance of migration, until the 1970s, when Richard Sidman and Pasko Rakic confi rmed the idea that young neurons migrate along radially arranged glial processes. In a series of studies, Rakic and Sidman used EM studies to document the proposal that the neurons were closely apposed to the radial glial fi bers Experiments by As methods became available to culture acute slices of developing brain, it became feasible to acquire real time images of neurons migrating in the complex setting of developing brain tissue. Lipophilic dyes Methods for real time imaging, such as spinning disc confocal imaging, and for imaging cells deep in living tissue with multiphoton systems are evolving rapidly, providing neurobiologists with the tools to study the molecular regulation of CNS migrations. These experiments have occurred in parallel with cell biological studies of the fundamental mechanisms of metazoan motility, described briefl y earlier.  Genetic studies by Anthony and Heintz Cortical Interneurons Although radial migration was once thought to be the primary mode of CNS migrations in cortical regions of vertebrate brain, we now realize that a small subset of the total population of neurons in the murine neocortex migrate from the neocortical VZ to form the layers of the mature cerebral cortex The Rostral Migratory Stream Between E12.5 and E14 in the mouse (E14-16 in the rat), a secondary proliferative zone is formed along the third ventricle of the forebrain RMS neurons migrate from the SVZ to the olfactory bulb by a unique mechanism. As the neurons move, they use other migrating neurons in the stream as a substrate Several secreted signaling molecules are thought to guide the migration of RMS neuroblasts to the olfactory bulb, including the diffusible chemoattractants netrin-1 The neurons of the marginal zone, later the preplate and layer 1 of the neocortex, have long been assumed to be the earliest generated neurons in the cortical VZ. Classical studies held that these cells exited the cell cycle beginning on about E10 in the mouse and then migrated away from the VZ to form the overlying preplate between days 11 and 12 Similarly studies on Wnt3a+ cells showed that cells of the cortical hem also contribute to the preplate via a superfi cial migratory pathway across the surface of the neocortex. Recently cloning of genes related to migration genes in C. elegans led to the discovery that preplate neurons express Mig-13A, a gene related to optics. The cytology and neuron-glial relationship of a cerebellar granule neuron migrating on a glial fi ber. With live imaging of neuronal migration along glial fi bers, the granule neuron closely apposes the cell glial fi ber (GF) along the length of the neuronal soma (MN) and extends a leading process (LP) in the direction of migration along the glial guide. The nucleus is in the posterior aspect of the cell during periods of movement, the centrosome is just forward of the neuronal nucleus. (A) In migrating neurons, the polarity signaling complex mPar6a localizes to the centrosome, and apparently orchestrates the movement of the neuron along the glial guide. Labeling with antibodies against p50 dynactin labels the centrosome and dynein on the surface of the nucleus. Antibodies against tubulin reveal a perinuclear "cage" of tubulin in migrating neurons. (B) Live imaging of a cerebellar granule neuron migrating on a glial fi ber. (C) Cytology of cerebellar and hippocampal neurons migrating along homotypic and heterotypic astroglial fi bers: Cerebellar granule neuron migrating along a hippocampal glial fi ber (CB/HP), a cerebellar granule neuron migrating on a cerebellar glial fi ber (CB/CB), a hippocampal neuron migrating along a cerebellar glial fi ber (HP/CB), or a hippocampal neuron migrating on a hippocampal glial fi ber (HP/HP). In heterotypic cocultures, migrating neurons have a stereotyped cytology, extending their cell soma along the glial guide and extending a leading process in the direction of migration.the C. elegans Mig-13 gene. The dynamics of cell migrations and patterns of axon outgrowth of apparent precursors of neurons within sensory areas of the neocortex are revealed by imaging the movements of labeled cells in Egfp-Lrp12-BAC transgenic mice Cerebellar System During embryogenesis, the cerebellar territory arises from rhombomere 1, delineated FIGURE 16.13 Comparison of the cellular organization of neurons migrating on glial fi bers (A) and fi broblasts migrating in vivo (B). As the neuron migrates, the polarity complex mPar6a and signaling pathways, polarize the migrating cell. mPar6a localizes to the centrosome, paces the timing of the movement of the neuron along the glial fi ber via Myosin IIB-mediated contraction of F-actin in the proximal aspect of the leading process. A perinuclear cage of tubulin positions the nucleus in the posterior aspect of the cell. Microtubules grow out of the centrosome into the leading process and support vesicle transport during movement. As the neurons moves, it forms attachments beneath the cell soma (blue), which provides traction for neuronal locomotion along the fi ber. (B) The model shown represents a polarized cell that has distinct leading and trailing edges. This is a common feature of fi broblastic motility. The leading edge points in the direction of movement and is driven by actin-polymerization-mediated protrusion. Red spots represent points of interaction of the cell with the substrate. The larger spots represent stable adhesions (a classic feature of fi broblastic motility that is absent in faster-moving cells), and smaller spots at the periphery represent nascent adhesion complexes. Color gradients within the spot represent the dynamics of adhesion turnover (at the front) and disassembly (at the back). Other structures depicted include the nucleus (light brown), the Golgi apparatus (dark brown), and the microtubuleorganizing center (MTOC), from which the microtubule network (gray) radiates, as well as an actin-rich lamellipodium at the front. Insets show specifi c features within the migrating cell, such as the regulation of actin polymerization at the protrusion sites, adhesion dynamics, MTOC-and nucleus-based cell polarity and tail retraction, as well as a node map depicting some of the key molecules involved in regulation of the process Reproduced from by the expression of Hoxa2 (posterior) and Otx2 (anterior). In the mouse, between E9.0 and E9.5, the pontine fl exure creates an area along the border of the mesencephalon and metencephalon, where the neural tube fails to close, the rhombic lip III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT hindbrain domains of the rhombic lip form a continuous proliferative epithelium, which contains overlapping pools of progenitor cells that express combinatorial patterns of transcription factors. Recent lineage tracing experiments demonstrate that progenitor cell populations in the rhombic lip generate both cerebellar granule cells and neurons of the cerebellar nuclei, the lateral pontine nucleus and the cochlear nucleus Thus, experiments on the allocation of cell fate among RL precursors destined for the cerebellar cortex, the cerebellar nuclei, and the precerebellar nuclei of the chick and mouse demonstrate that combinatorial patterns of transcription factor expression mark progenitors of the cerebellar nuclei (Irx3/Meis2/Lhx2/9), granule neurons (Meis1) of the cerebellar cortex, and the lateral pontine nucleus (Pcsk9, Pde1c, Math1). In addition to marking classes of cerebellar progenitors, patterns of transcription factor expression illustrate the complex migrations that generate the nuclear and cortical regions of the cerebellum During CNS development, a remarkable range of neuronal migrations set forth the architectonics of the brain. In general, these migrations can be seen as DV or AP migrations, pathways thought to be prominent in lower organisms but not in vertebrates. Indeed, genes discovered in C. elegans and Drosophila provide molecular cues for guiding migrations in higher vertebrates, and conserved polarity proteins and their signaling pathways play a key role sensing directional cues, polarizing cellular extrusions, and generating forces required to propel cells along pathways defi ned by specifi c adhesions and/or chemoattractants. Insights from studies on fi broblast motility have been especially informative to general aspects of neuronal motility, and will likely continue to provide novel methods for studying the molecular controls of neuronal migrations. The relationship of cell migrations, the establishment of the neuronal layers and brain circuitry will ultimately require novel insights into the role of the transient scaffolding systems of cortical development, the preplate, subplate, and cortical plate, which appear to pattern the connections between laminar, cortical areas of the brain, subcortical nuclei, and the formation of sensorimotor pathways. Over the past decade, a number of tangential migratory pathways have been described, in addition to radial pathways (black), including the migration of interneurons from the basal forebrain into the developing neocortex (blue), the migration of neurons from the SVZ to the olfactory bulb along the rostral migratory stream (red), and migrations of progenitors from the rhombic lip to cerebellar cortex (green), and the precerebellar nuclei of the brainstem (purple). Reprinted from Anderson, S. A., Approximately 100 years ago, Ramón y Cajal described the trajectories taken by nerve cell processes as they extend toward their intermediate and fi nal targets. From these observations he inferred that multiple infl uences likely guide growing axons. Cajal also observed for the fi rst time the growing tips of axons and named them growth cones. In an unparalleled feat of scientifi c conjecture based on morphological observations of fi xed material, he described their behavior:From the functional point of view, one might say that the growth cone is like a club or battering ram endowed with exquisite chemical sensitivity, rapid ameboid movements, and a certain motive force allowing it to circumvent obstacles in its path, thus coursing between various cells until reaching its destination. The growth cone at the distal tip of an axon extending in tissue culture is fl attened into a thin fan-shaped sheet with many long, very thin spikes radiating forward ( Growth cones crawl forward as they elaborate the axons trailing behind them, and their extension is controlled by cues in their outside environment that ultimately direct them toward their appropriate targets. What is the nature of these guidance cues and how do they affect growth cone behavior? One view to account for the ability of the nervous system to wire itself, already implicit in Ramon y Cajal's writings and reinforced by Speidel's observations, held that axonal growth is highly directed, with each class of axons navigating along a distinctive prescribed pathway to reach its target. For example, during neural development spinal commissural axons extend seemingly unerringly toward the ventral-most region of the spinal cord, cross to the contralateral side, and then extend rostrally to targets in the brain A number of experiments provided evidence supporting directed axon growth, including the classic experiments of Sperry, started in the 1940s, demonstrating highly specifi c targeting of regenerating retinal ganglion cell axons to the optic tectum The rest of this chapter focuses on the fi rst step in the formation of connections: the directed growth of axons to target fi elds. The selection of target cells and the role of electrical activity in this process are discussed in Chapters 18 and 20.How do axons succeed in navigating through the embryonic environment to targets that in some cases can be many centimeters away? The trajectories of many axons appear to be broken up into short segments, each perhaps a few hundred micrometers long.The daunting task of reaching a distant target is then reduced to the simpler task of navigating each of these successive segments. This task is well illustrated by the projections of commissural neurons in the spinal cord, illustrated in misrouting of the axons when they reach the midline The identifi cation of signaling molecules that function as guidance cues has depended primarily on three experimental approaches: (1) pairing biochemistry and in vitro tissue culture assays to detect proteins with either attractive or repellent properties, (2) using forward genetics to identify mutations that affect axon trajectories in vivo, or (3) using genetic and tissue culture approaches to characterize the functions of molecules with distributions or molecular structures that make them attractive candidate guidance cues.Studies over the past decade and a half, in this way, have led to the identifi cation of several prominent families of signaling molecules that function as instructive guidance cues. A fi rst wave of studies in the 1990s identifi ed four major families that have wellestablished and widespread roles in axon guidance: semaphorins, netrins, slits, and ephrins ( These different families of guidance cues are discussed briefl y to illustrate these features of wiring mechanisms. We start by reviewing each of the four families of "canonical" guidance cues, before briefl y describing the roles of morphogens and growth factors in guidance. We also focus specifi cally on members of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, which have diverse roles as ligands and receptors in axons guidance. Individual growth cones might be "pushed" from behind by a chemorepellent, "pulled" from in front by a chemoattractant, and "hemmed in" by attractive and repulsive local cues (cell surface or extracellular matrix molecules). Adapted from Tessier-Lavigne and The netrin family ( Two types of experiments have supported this view. First, netrin-1 can clearly attract the axons in various assays. For example, when pieces of dorsal spinal cord are placed in tissue culture and viewed from the side, commissural axons grow within the tissue along a vertical dorso-ventral trajectory, but when cells secreting netrin-1 are placed alongside the dorsal spinal cord pieces, the axons are defl ected from this trajectory and turn toward the source ( In addition to attracting commissural axons, netrins have been shown to function in attracting other subsets of axons to various targets in the retina and brain. Remarkably, netrin-1 also appears to function as a long-range repellent, providing a push from behind for a group of axons in the hindbrain that grow away from the midline, thus illustrating the bifunctionality of guidance cues.Strikingly, netrins are vertebrate homologues of the UNC-6 protein of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, a protein similarly involved in both attracting some axons toward the nervous system midline and in repelling others away from it ( The signaling mechanisms mediating attraction and repulsion are currently the subject of intense investigation. One interesting fi nding suggests that the signaling machinery within growth cones is organized to allow rapid switching from attractive to repulsive responses. Specifi cally, the responses of growth cones that are attracted to netrin-1 can be converted to repulsive responses through pharmacological manipulations that result in a reduction in cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling (for instance, incubation with a membrane permeable inhibitor of the cAMP effector protein kinase A (PKA)) Identifi cation of netrins as long-range guidance cues also illustrates the fact that long-range and short-range guidance mechanisms can be closely related. Although netrins are capable of long-range attraction, they are closely related in structure to one region of the archetypal nondiffusible extracellular matrix (ECM) molecule laminin-1. In fact, the extent to which netrins can diffuse in the embryo appears to be regulated so that in some circumstances they function as local rather than long-range cues, as shown in some regions in the nematode C. elegans, in the vertebrate retina, and at the Drosophila midline Netrin The semaphorin family of proteins includes many secreted and membrane-associated proteins, suggesting that these cues also act at both long and shortrange FIGURE 17.7 Netrin bifunctionality depends upon both receptor composition and intracellular signaling. (A) Single Xenopus spinal neurons in culture are attracted and steer along an increasing gradient of netrin-1 originating from a micropipette (hollow arrow, upper right: green arrow, netrin; white outlined arrow, control). These neurons express DCC on their surface. (B) If a Xenopus neuron expresses both DCC and UNC5 receptors, these proteins form a signaling complex which now interprets netrin-1 as a repellent, and they steer down the gradient. (C) Inhibition of cAMP-mediated signaling using a protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor also converts netrin-1 attraction to repulsion, even though these neurons only express DCC. The major receptors for semaphorins are members of the plexin family, transmembrane proteins that are distant relatives of the semaphorins themselves and include nine different proteins in higher vertebrates ( Plexin receptor activation can initiate a series of intracellular signaling events that results in the local disassembly of growth cone cytoskeletal components and substrate attachments, ultimately producing inhibition of axon outgrowth or repulsive steering Semaphorins facilitate the formation of central and peripheral axon pathways by regulating axon pathfi nding and fasciculation, however semaphorins also have been implicated in targeting axons to the specifi c locations of their synaptic partners, in directing the pruning of exuberant projections in the hippocampus, and in regulating the morphology of cortical pyramidal neuron dendrites Slits are large secreted proteins In all species, the repulsive actions of slit proteins are mediated by receptors of the Roundabout or Robo family The fourth family of "canonical" guidance cues are the ephrins, cell surface signaling molecules that play important roles in a large number of developmental events including axon guidance Ephrins have been shown to play an essential role in organizing topographic projections that connect, for example, retinal ganglion cells in the eye with their target cells in the appropriate portion of the optic tectum in lower vertebrates, or the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus in higher vertebrates. These mapping functions demonstrate the versatility of ephrins, which can function as attractants for some axons and repellents for other, as well as either positive or negative regulators of axonal branching. These functions in topographic mapping are discussed in detail in Chapter 18. In addition to topographic mapping, ephrins are implicated as short-range attractants and repellents in the guidance of a variety of central and peripheral axons.As important as the "canonical" guidance cue families are, they do not account for all of axon guidance. Studies over the past decade have revealed that various morphogens and growth factors have also been coopted to guide axons Morphogens are proteins that function to specify cell fates at earlier stages of embryonic development; the term refers specifi cally to factors that can induce different fates in a dose-dependent fashion. Three key families of developmental morphogens have been implicated in axon guidance as well: members of the hedgehog (Hh), bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), and Wnt families. These families were introduced in Chapter 15 in the discussion of cell fate determination. The evidence implicating these factors in axon guidance is growing, and is particularly well established in the vertebrate spinal cord. Here, members of all three families having been shown to collaborate with classic guidance cues of the netrin and slit families, as we will discuss in detail in a later section of this chapter. Outside the spinal cord, evidence for guidance functions of members of the BMP and hedgehog families is still limited. An example has been described in the vertebrate retina (involving sonic hedgehog), but just how widely these factors function as guidance cues remains to be determined. The evidence implicating Wnt family members in guidance is, however, already quite extensive, as they appear to play key roles in axon guidance along the longitudinal (anterior-posterior) axis in C. elegans, Drosophila, and vertebrates, and they are also implicated in topographic mapping in the retinotectal system Whereas morphogens that function at early stages of development have been coopted to guide axons at later stages, various growth factors initially known for their functions at later stages of nervous system development-particularly in regulating the survival of neurons (Chapter 19)-have been found also to play an earlier role in axon guidance. So far, these factors are all implicated as attractants: hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), fi broblast growth factors (FGFs) and glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) for subsets of motor axons, neurotrophins (BDNF and NT3) for sensory axons, and neuregulins for thalamocortical axons The following sections of this chapter explain how the guidance cues just discussed are deployed in vivo to affect accurate guidance. Before turning to this, however, we describe one family of proteins, already discussed to a limited extent, that has diverse roles in regulating nervous system wiring: the Ig superfamily proteins.Initial work directed toward understanding nervous system connectivity in part focused on identifying factors that promote neuronal adhesion to substrates, with the hope this might explain complex wiring patterns. In the 1980s several cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) were identifi ed, including a protein called neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) that was shown to mediate in vitro adhesive inter actions in a homophilic (like-binds-like) fashion. NCAM contains a large extracellular domain structure that includes multiple repeats of an immunoglobulin (Ig)-C2 motif, and also several fi bronectin type II repeats FasII is expressed on a defi ned subset of fascicles in the developing insect CNS and PNS. Axons that contribute to FasII-expressing pathways still extend in approximately correct directions in FasII mutants. However, ultrastructural analysis reveals that in FasII mutants, axons that normally express FasII on their surface and maintain very close contact now fail to bundle together, and instead proceed independently A myriad of different Ig superfamily proteins is expressed in developing neurons, including CAMs and also receptors for canonical guidance cues (such as DCC, Robo, and Unc5; see earlier). Recent work also demonstrates a novel repulsive function for homophilic interactions involving the CAM Dscam (Down Syndrome CAM) in Drosophila neural development Several prominent classes of guidance cues have been identifi ed: the four families of canonical guidance cues (netrins, semaphorins, slits, and ephrins), whose functions in guidance are widespread and well established; three families of morphogens (Hedgehogs, BMPs, and Wnts), whose functions are just being defi ned; a growing set of growth factors implicated in select attractive guidance events; and members of the Ig superfamily, which, beyond their roles as receptors for other guidance cues, are implicated in axon fasciculation and, recently, in axonal repulsion. These guidance cues can function in long-range or short-range axon guidance. Many guidance cues are multifunctional and can function in attraction, in repulsion, or in regulating branch formation. Furthermore, many cues are conserved evolutionarily, both in structure and in function, between vertebrates and invertebrates. In addition to these molecules, yet other molecules appear to contribute to guidance in ways that are just being defi ned; these include other extracellular matrix components, transmembrane phosphatases, and cadherins Guidance cues are signaling molecules that infl uence the cell biological mechanisms by which growth cones extend, turn, and retract. The forward-crawling motion of a growth cone depends on its own intrinsic motile mechanism interacting with a permissive outside environment. The extension and withdrawal of the leading edge and fi lopodia are an intrinsic property of a healthy growth cone. Once the leading edge has extended, an appropriate substratum on which it can attach and become stabilized must be present. Once attached, an inherent traction-generating mechanism within the growth cone causes tension to develop. Unattached or poorly attached processes are thereby withdrawn, whereas tension exerted against attached processes helps draw the body of the growth cone forward. The continuous repeated cycling of extension, attachment, retraction of poorly attached processes, and tension generation produces net forward extension. In principle, guidance cues could act at any one of these steps to affect the direction in which growth cones extend.Within growth cones the distribution of actin and microtubules is dramatically segregated, with micro-GUIDANCE CUES AND THE CONTROL OF CYTOSKELETAL DYNAMICS 391 FIGURE 17.9 Ig superfamily members regulate axon fasciculation and can also serve as repellents. (A) The fasciclin II (FasII) protein, an Ig superfamily member, is required for axons that make up the FasII-expressing MP1 fascicle to remain in close apposition to one another. Wild-type (left) and FasII mutant (right) embryonic CNS regions that include the MP1 pathway are depicted schematically as viewed from above, and are viewed in cross section in an electron microscopy section (one of a complete serial reconstruction) taken at the location of the arrow, and with MP1, dMP2, and pCC axonal projections colored to highlight their position. In wild-type embryos, the dMP2, MP1, and pCC neurons are closely associated in the same fascicle and share extensive cell membrane contacts. However, in FasII mutants these same neurons do not share extensive membrane contact and extend separately (blue arrow indicates tip of pCC axon). Modifi ed from . (B) Schematic representation of embryonic Drosophila motor neurons extending from the CNS onto muscles (rectangles) in the periphery. In wild-type embryos (left) motor axons exit the CNS as part of a single bundle but then, at specifi c choice points, subsets of these axons defasciculate from the main bundle and enter regions that contain the different muscles upon which they will elaborate synaptic arborizations. When FasII is over-expressed in all motor neurons (FasII gain-of function (GOF)), motor axons often fail to defasciculate and instead bypass their normal choice points (middle). A similar result is observed in the absence of the axonal repellent Sema 1a: Sema-1a loss of function (LOF) (middle). However, the combination of Sema-1a LOF and FasII LOF restores the balance of attraction and repulsion along these axons and results in signifi cant resuce of normal motor axon pathfi nding tubules primarily occupying the axon shaft and the central domain of the growth cone, and actin residing in the peripheral domain Particular representatives of several families of proteins have been shown to provide permissive substrata for growth cone extension. Among these are extracellular matrix molecules such as laminin-1 and fi bronectin, and also specialized cell surface molecules from either the immunoglobulin superfamily or the cadherin family. These molecules are bound by specifi c cell surface molecules on the growth cone, including members of the integrin, Ig, and cadherin superfamilies. Although these proteins provide potent permissive substrates for cultured neurons, it is still unknown whether they or other classes of molecules are the major permissive factors for axon growth in vivo. At least two of the sets of canonical guidance cues, the netrins and semaphorins, are known to include members that have a permissive role for axon growth in vivo.Microtubules also play a key role in regulating growth cone advance. In the axon and proximal region of the growth cone's central domain, microtubule polymers are bundled and relatively stable. However, toward the peripheral region a highly dynamic population of microtubule polymers extends individually toward the leading edge along fi lopodia Cell surface receptors that bind permissive substratum molecules must in turn be linked to the cellular cytoskeleton. Indirect linkages between the cytoskeleton and members of the integrin, cadherin, and immunoglobulin families can give the cytoskeleton traction on the substratum and facilitate growth cone advance ( The linkage of F-actin to the substratum generates tension within the growth cone and causes processes that are poorly attached to the substratum to shrink or withdraw. When the retrograde movement of actin is impeded by a relatively strong attachment between the actin cytoskeleton and the surface substratum, not only is the leading edge of the growth cone advanced, FIGURE 17.10 Distributions of microtubules and fi brillar actin in a neuronal growth cone. Microtubules and fi brillary actin are highly compartmentalized within growth cones. Microtubules (green) are a key structural component of the axon and though tightly bundled within the axon shaft, a dynamic sub-population of microtubules actively explores the peripheral domain of the growth cone by extending along fi lopodia. All of the growing ends of microtubules are pointed toward the leading edge. In contrast, actin (red) is highly concentrated in the fi lopodia and in the leading edges of lamellae. Within fi lopodia, actin fi brils are oriented with their growing tips pointed distally. The same is true of many fi brils within lamellae, although many additional fi brils are oriented randomly and form a dense meshwork. Modifi ed from . (B) The organization of cytoplasmic domains and cytoskeletal components in an Aplysia bag cell growth cone. Fluorescent labeling of microtubules (green) and fi brillar actin (red) shows their segregation within the growth cone central and peripheral domains, respectively. Note the extension of a small number of microtubules into the actin-rich peripheral domain. From In this way, fi lopodia can act as scouts for less advanced portions of the growth cone, either seizing hold of permissive substrata or avoiding nonpermissive or inhibitory substrates, and thereby reorienting subsequent process extension.FIGURE 17.11 Actin dynamics regulate growth cone advance.(A) A schematic representation of a growth cone fi lopodium, depicting polarized assembly and disassembly of actin monomers at the distal (red triangles) and proximal (yellow triangles) ends of a fi brillar actin fi lament. Retrograde fl ow (large arrow) of fi brillar actin polymers occurs through the action of non-muscle myosin. This can be visualized by the proximal translocation of a particle that is linked to the actin cytoskeleton (sphere), which fails to occur if myosin function in is inhibited. Modifi ed from How do cues such as semaphorins, netrins, slits, and ephrins tap into these mechanisms for growth cone extension to affect guidance? Attractive and repulsive signals could promote the extension of the leading edge by increasing the local rate of actin polymerization in the preferred direction or by decreasing its rate of depolymerization in other directions. Guidance cues also could modulate the rate of myosinmediated F-actin translocation, thereby stimulating or inhibiting fi lopodia and leading edge retraction. It is therefore reasonable to expect that many signaling pathways activated by guidance cues ultimately converge on actin dynamics. Studies on the receptor mechanisms for the several families of guidance cues described earlier show that activation of these receptors often directly or indirectly alters the activity of small Rho family GTPases such as Rac and Rho, which are key regulators of actin dynamics and impact on cell motility in a large variety of cell types Growing axons utilize an intrinsic, actin-based treadmilling mechanism to extend fi lopodia and advance the leading edge of the growth cone. Growth cone extension requires an appropriate substratum for attachment and stabilization, which allows an inherent traction-generating mechanism within the growth cone to generate tension. This tension results in the withdrawal of poorly attached processes and the growth of processes that form attachments with the substratum. Net forward extension results from repeated cycles of extension, attachment, and the retraction of poorly attached processes. Cell surface receptors that bind substratum molecules are linked indirectly to the cellular cytoskeleton, and these linkages can be modulated by the activation of signaling pathways. The binding of extracellular guidance cues to receptors on the growth cone surface modulates axon growth through several mechanisms, including regulation of actin polymerization, F-actin treadmilling, linkage between the growth cone cytoskeleton and the substrate, and modulation of microtubule dynamics. Many guidance receptors directly or indirectly modulate the activity of small Rho family GTPases, which are key regulators of actin polymerization.How are guidance cues interpreted by growth cones in vivo and how do they direct the appropriate wiring together of the nervous system? The guidance of an axon from its inception through its acquisition of a target is a complex process that can be broken down into a series of discrete decisions. This section illustrates how multiple guidance cues and receptors cooperate closely to direct a complex series of guidance events at the nervous system midline.Single guidance cues probably rarely or never act by themselves, and the integration of several simultaneously active cues is required for most, if not all, guidance decisions. This can be illustrated by interactions between the activities of many different guidance cues at the midline of the developing nervous systems of both invertebrates and vertebrates, which have been elucidated through genetic, biochemical, and embryological studies in rodents, Drosophila and C. elegans. Focusing on the mammalian spinal cord, we describe four important regulatory mechanisms that are required for reaching, crossing, and leaving the midline: initial attraction, switching on of repulsion, switching off of attraction, and prevention of premature repulsion. These mechanisms involve both canonical guidance cues, illustrated in As mentioned earlier, in both vertebrates and invertebrates the so-called commissural axons are attracted to the nervous system midline by members of the netrin family, which activate receptors of the DCC family FIGURE 17.12 Microtubule dynamics can be directly regulated by extracellular cues. Two different microtubule binding proteins, CLASP and APC, bind to the distal (+) end of microtubules and are intracellular targets for guidance cue signaling. Slitmediated repulsion results in activation of CLASP, which in turn stabilizes microtubules and prevents their extension into the growth cone periphery The midline is not, however, the fi nal destination for commissural axons: upon reaching it, axons cross the midline, then they turn at right angles and project alongside the midline to other levels of the embryo, and fi nally they leave the midline area altogether to reach their eventual targets The upregulation of responsiveness to midline repellents is only half of the equation, however; to be effi ciently expelled from the midline, it would be desirable for the axons to stop being attracted. Indeed, the attractive response of these axons to netrins is switched off (silenced) as the axons cross the midline. There is evidence that the silencing of netrin attraction is caused by activation of the slit receptor Robo: activation of Robo by slit causes a specifi c region of its cytoplasmic domain to bind a specifi c region of the cytoplasmic domain of the netrin receptor DCC and to prevent it from transducing an attractive response to netrin For guidance at the midline to occur accurately, it is essential that the switch from attraction to repulsion be carefully choreographed. In particular, it is essential that growth cones upregulate responses to repellents only after crossing the midline, not before, otherwise the axons would not be able to enter the midline. It is perhaps not surprising, then, that there are mechanisms that ensure these axons do not become responsive to repellents too soon. One mechanism that regulates the switch, already mentioned, is that the Robo receptors are expressed only at low levels before crossing, being upregulated only after crossing. How surface expression of these receptors is controlled is poorly understood, although in Drosophila this appears to occur at the level of regulated traffi cking of the receptor to the neuronal cell surface under the control of a protein called Commissureless. However, the low level of Robo receptor that is present on the axons before crossing appears to be capable nonetheless of transducing a repulsive slit signal that can prevent FIGURE 17.13 A switch from attraction to repulsion allows commissural axons to enter then leave the CNS midline. (A) Schematic of a cross-section through the mammalian spinal cord (as in midline crossing, and which must be silenced. In vertebrates, this is achieved by a more divergent member of the Robo family called Robo3 (also known as Rig1). Robo3 is expressed on commissural axons before and during crossing, and it silences the repulsive slit signal mediated by other Robo receptors, allowing the axons to cross Remarkably, a similar midline crossing defect is caused by mutations in the human ROBO3 gene, found in patients with a syndrome known as Horizontal Gaze Palsy with Progressive Scoliosis (HGPPS) The ability illustrated here of growth cones to change their responses to guidance cues makes it possible for them to move from one intermediate target (such as the midline) to the next along their often complex and lengthy trajectories. Guidance at the midline also has shed light on the mechanisms involved in longitudinal guidance (i.e., along the anteriorposterior axis). Upon crossing the midline, commissural axons turn either anteriorly or posteriorly; in particular, the earliest born commissural axons in the mammalian spinal cord turn in an anterior direction. This anterior turn appears to be directed by an anterior-to-posterior gradient of Wnt protein in the spinal cord, which the growth cones sense as an attractive cue ( The study of the growth of commissural axons to and beyond the midline exemplifi es how guidance of axons in vivo involves the simultaneous interpretation of multiple cues, including canonical guidance cues and morphogens, and how dynamic changes in axon responsiveness enables axons to navigate successive intermediate targets. Before reaching the midline, commissural axons are guided through the combined actions of repellent BMPs, providing a "push from behind," and the attractive effects of netrin-1 and sonic hedgehog from the ventral midline. Just as important, these axons are insensitive to midline repellents, which allows them to enter and cross the midline; this is achieved in part by Robo3, expressed on the axons before crossing, which prevents them from sensing repellent midline slits. Upon reaching the midline, the axons acquire responsiveness to the repellent molecules, including slits, through upregulation of the function of repellent receptors, including Robo receptors for midline slits. They concomitantly lose responsiveness to the midline attractants. The coordinated switch from attraction to repulsion ensures that the axons can move on from the midline. Finally, the precise positioning of the axons in axon tracts after midline crossing involves a code of Robo proteins, and the anterior turn is directed by a Wnt gradient.III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT Luo, Y., A fundamental issue in neurobiology is defi ning the mechanisms by which neurons recognize and innervate their targets. The formation of a proper functioning nervous system depends on the development of precise connectivity between appropriate sets of neurons or neurons with peripheral targets such as muscles, tendons, skin, and various organs. The development of appropriate synaptic connections requires a series of steps including the specifi cation and generation of neurons and their target cells (Chapters 14, 15, and 16), the guidance of axons to their targets (Chapter 17), the selection of appropriate targets, the formation of orderly specifi c projections within the target, and ultimately the induction of a specialized presynaptic terminal and postsynaptic membrane (this chapter). The fi rst section of this chapter will focus on the mechanisms and molecules that govern target selection by cortical and retinal axons, and the formation of topographically ordered connections. The second section will focus on the signaling molecules and mechanisms that induce presynaptic and postsynaptic differentiation at the neuromuscular synapse. The third section will summarize current views of how presynaptic and postsynaptic differentiation is initiated in the central nervous system (CNS).As discussed in Chapter 17, the growth cone makes navigational decisions in response to axon guidance molecules. This process of pathfi nding by the growth cone is crucial to bring the axon within the vicinity of its targets. The growth cone has also long been considered to be responsible for the process of target selection itself. In some vertebrate systems, and especially in many of the projections studied in Drosophila and other invertebrates, the growth cone tipping the primary axon does ultimately select its target. Many neurons, though, in the vertebrate brain innervate multiple, widely separated targets by axon collaterals, and therefore face a unique problem of target selection during development. It has now become clear that in these situations, the process of target selection is accomplished by a distinct mechanism, often referred to as interstitial axon branching, a phenomenon fi rst described as a targeting mechanism by Dennis O'Leary and colleagues in mid-late 1980s.A prominent example of neurons that employ delayed interstitial branching as a mechanism of target selection is layer 5 neurons in the mammalian neocortex ( Examples of interstitial branching as the primary mechanism of target selection in vertebrates are accumulating. These examples include the extensive analysis by Katherine Kalil and coworkers on the development of cortical callosal projections, as well as development of axonal projections from the hippocampal formation (i.e., the subiculum) to the mammillary bodies, dorsal root ganglion neurons to the spinal gray matter, the innervation of the cortical plate by thalamic axons and of the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus by retinal axons. In addition, as discussed later, the formation of topographic connections by retinal axons in the optic tectum of chicks and superior colliculus of rodents also occurs by interstitial branching along the axon shaft.The development of many axonal projections in the brain is characterized by an initially exuberant, or widespread, growth of axons, followed by the elimination of functionally inappropriate axon segments and branches. For example, this mechanism is used to generate the adult patterns of callosal, intracortical, and subcortical projections of the mammalian neocortex The organization of the adult neocortex into functionally specialized areas requires that each area establishes projections to specifi c subsets of targets in the brainstem and spinal cord. During development, though, layer 5 neurons project more broadly, and form collateral projections to a larger set of layer 5 targets than they will retain in the adult The cellular mechanisms that control axon elimination and the fi nal patterning of cortical projections are not well understood. In general, axon elimination occurs through one of two distinct phenomena that relate to the scale of the event: small-scale elimination typically occurs by retraction, whereas large-scale elimination, as discussed earlier for layer 5 axon patterning, relies primarily on degeneration, which is similar in appearance to Wallerian degeneration but is mechanistically distinct Heterotopic transplant experiments by O'Leary and Brent Stanfi eld show that collateral elimination by layer 5 neurons is also plastic during development. Developing layer 5 neurons transplanted from visual cortex to motor cortex permanently retain their normally transient spinal axon, whereas layer 5 neurons transplanted from motor cortex to visual cortex lose their normally permanent spinal axon and retain their transient axon collateral to the superior colliculus. Thus, the projections retained by the transplanted layer 5 neurons are appropriate for the cortical area in which the transplanted neurons develop, not where they were born.Most projections in the vertebrate brain are formed by the mechanism of delayed interstitial branching along the length of the axon shaft rather than by direct axon targeting. During development, neurons often project to more targets than in the adult, and generate their adult pattern of connections through a process of selective axon or collateral elimination. This developmental phenomenon of transiently "exuberant" axonal projections may provide a substrate for developmental plasticity. For example, alterations in axon elimination may be a source of functional sparing or recovery following neural insults during development. In addition, this mechanism may contribute to differences between species in axonal connections as suggested by studies of the projection from the subiculum to the TARGET SELECTION mammillary bodies in mammals ranging from rodents to rabbits to elephants Once axons reach their targets, they must select appropriate target cells with which to form synaptic connections. Many axonal projections within the brain establish an orderly arrangement of connections within their target fi eld, termed a topographic map. These maps are arranged such that the spatial order of the cells of origin is refl ected in the order of their axon terminations, thereby neighboring cells project to neighboring parts of the target to form a smooth and continuous map. Topographic projections are especially evident in sensory systems, such as the somatosensory and visual. In the somatosensory system, a map of the sensory receptors distributed on the body is reiterated multiple times at various levels of the neuraxis. In the visual system, the main objective is to represent the visual world in the brain; that is, to reconstruct a topographic representation of the visual world that projects onto the retina and is remapped multiple times in the brain, initially through direct retinal projections to the dorsal thalamus and midbrain, and subsequently by higher order projections. This precise mapping requires the maintenance of the spatial ordering of the axons of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) within their central targets in a pattern that refl ects their origins in the retina. The projection from the retina to its major midbrain target, the superior colliculus (SC) of mammals, or its nonmammalian homologue, the optic tectum (OT), has been the predominant model system for studying the mechanisms that account for the development of topographic axonal connections. The relative size of the OT and SC in the species predominantly used as models to study the development of topographic maps is shown in A large body of evidence developed over the past 50 years has shown that the target presents guidance information to incoming axons that controls their development of topographic connections. This work has culminated in the discovery of topographic guidance molecules over the past decade. Further, the development of a fully refi ned map requires activity-dependent mechanisms that are infl uenced by retinal waves that correlate the patterns of spiking activity between neighboring RGCs. These molecules and mechanisms will be discussed in detail in the following sections and placed into a historical context.The mechanisms that control the establishment of topographic maps have been intensively studied for many decades, but only in recent years has the molecular control of this process begun to be defi ned. The chemoaffi nity hypothesis, formally proposed by Roger Sperry over 40 years ago Sperry proposed that molecular tags on projecting axons and their target cells determine the specifi city of axonal connections within a neural map. Further, he suggested that these molecular tags might establish topography through their distribution in complementary gradients that mark corresponding points in both sensory and target structures. The representation of the retina onto the tectum (or SC) typically is simplifi ed to the mapping of two sets of orthogonallyoriented axes: the temporal (T)-nasal (N) axis of the retina along the anterior (A)-posterior (P) axis of the tectum, and the ventral (V)-dorsal (D) axis of the retina along the medial (M)-lateral (L) axis (also referred to as the D-V axis) of the tectum. Based on the chemoaffi nity hypothesis, each point in the tectum would have a unique molecular address determined by the graded distribution of topographic guidance molecules along the two tectal axes, and similarly each RGC would have a unique profi le of receptors for those molecules that would result in a position-dependent, differential response to them by RGC axons.Over the next half century, the specifi city of the projections of RGC axons to tectal cells was investigated further by the tracing of axonal projections following experimental manipulations, fi rst in the regenerating retinotectal system and later during the development of the projection. The manipulations included rotations or transplantations of the retina, tectum, and even the optic pathway, using either the whole structure or parts of it. These experiments showed that regenerating and developing RGC axons formed topographically appropriate connections even when they are experimentally defl ected within the tectum, or forced to enter the tectum from abnormal positions or with a reversal in the relative time of arrival of populations of RGC axons. Studies of this sort done by Bill Harris and Christine Holt were particularly compelling, and provided a body of evidence supporting the basic tenet of the chemoaffi nity hypothesis that the establishment of topographic projections involves the recognition of positional information on the tectum.Prior to the discovery of the ephrins (described later), the most compelling evidence for topographic guidance molecules came from the work of Friedrich Bonhoeffer and coworkers using several elegant in vitro assays, for example the membrane stripe assay, as well as the growth cone collapse assay codeveloped by Jonathon Raper. Using the membrane stripe assay, Bonhoeffer showed that chick temporal RGC axons given a choice between growing on alternating lanes of anterior and posterior tectal membranes, show a strong preference to grow on their topographically appropriate anterior membranes, whereas nasal RGC axons exhibit no preference Following the pioneering work of Sperry and Bonhoeffer, two major sets of events directly led to the axons. This elegant in vitro assay, developed by Friedrich Bonhoeffer, has been used extensively by many investigators to characterize repellent versus attractant effects of membrane-associated molecules on axon guidance. A retinal strip oriented along the nasal-temporal axis is explanted on carpets consisting of alternating 90 mm wide lanes of membranes derived from the anterior (A) or posterior (P) third of the tectum, or from heterologous cell lines (e.g., Cos or 293T cells) mock-transfected or transfected with ephrin-A2 or ephrin-A5 cDNA. RGC axons growing out of the temporal half of the retinal strip show a strong preference to grow on anterior tectal membranes, whereas those growing out of the nasal half show no preference. In contrast, temporal axons do not show a preference for anterior membranes when posterior membranes are pretreated with heat or proteases, indicating that the preference is due to a repellent in posterior membranes. ephrin-A2 and ephrin-A5 are candidate mediators of this repellent activity, since they are enriched in posterior membranes and repel retinal axons in the stripe assay. Adapted from O' The other major set of events was the result of the introduction of high resolution axon tracers, the lipophilic fl uorescent dyes DiI and DiO (and subsequently related molecules such as DiA and DiD), in the late 1980s that allowed for the fi rst time detailed analyses of the morphologies and behaviors exhibited by RGC axons in chicks and rodents as they form topographically ordered projections. This was important for several reasons, including that it allowed for the analysis of chicks and mice, which was critical to take advantage of genetic manipulations, and showed that interstitial axon branching was a key mechanism of map development in warm-blooded vertebrates. Prior to this work, the behavior of RGC axons during map development was based largely upon the studies of amphibians and fi sh done by many investigators, including Hollis Cline, Martha Constantine-Paton, Scott Fraser, Haijme Fujisawa, Bill Harris, Christine Holt, and Claudia Stuermer. Among the reasons for the initial focus on fi sh and amphibians is that they were already widely used for studies of retinotopic mapping because of their ability to regenerate retinal connections, the relative ease with which their visual systems could be experimentally studied, but most importantly, preexisting axon tracers (e.g., HRP, cobalt chloride) provided high resolution labeling of RGC axons in these cold-blooded animals although these and other available tracers did not in developing chicks and rodents. Numerous studies in frogs and fi sh concluded that topographic retinotectal connections develop by the direct topographic targeting of RGC axon growth cones Studies by O'Leary and colleagues using the new age high resolution lipophilic tracers, DiI and related compounds, revealed an unexpected and unique picture of the development of topographic retinotectal projections in warm-blooded animals, which in turn required a substantial reassessment of the mechanisms of mapping and roles for topographic guidance molecules in controlling them. They showed that development of retinotectal topography in chicks, rats, and mice is a multistep process that involves axon overshoot of the topographically correct position of the termination zone along the A-P axis of the target followed by topographically appropriate interstitial branching along the axon shaft.As schematized in Since the discovery of ephrin-As in the mid-1990s, six ephrin-As have been identifi ed, as well as nine EphA receptors In chick, ephrin-A2 is expressed in an increasing A-P gradient across the entire OT, and ephrin-A5 is expressed in a steeper A-P gradient largely limited to posterior OT; together they combine to form an increasing gradient of ephrin-As across the A-P axis. RGCs express EphA3, EphA4, and EphA5, but only EphA3 is expressed in a gradient, which is highest in temporal retina and lowest in nasal retina. Because temporal retina with high levels of EphA3 maps to anterior OT with low levels of ephrin-As, and vice versa, ephrin-A2 and ephrin-A5 were predicted to act as axon repellents that more strongly affect temporal axons than nasal axons. This suggestion has been confi rmed by in vitro and in vivo studies Although species-specifi c differences are apparent in the particular EphAs and ephrin-As that are expressed, or in their patterns of expression The graded expression of ephrin-As and their differential repulsion of temporal versus nasal RGC axons strongly implicated them as topographic guidance molecules. The fi rst genetic test of whether they are required for proper topographic mapping came from an analysis of mice with a targeted deletion of ephrin-A5 Although it is well established that ephrin-As mediate the repulsion of RGC axons by forward signaling through EphA receptors, genetic studies showing roles for EphAs have been few. Mice with a targeted deletion of EphA5 have mapping defects consistent with it mediating a repellent activity through forward signaling. A particularly intriguing study of EphA function was a gain-of-function strategy that took advantage of the features that ephrin-As bind and activate with similar effi cacy most EphA receptors, and that EphA3 is not expressed by RGCs in mice. Mice were generated in which EphA3 was ectopically expressed in about half of the RGCs uniformly distributed across the retina, thus producing two subpopulations of RGCs, one which has the wild-type gradient of EphA receptors (EphA5 and EphA6), and one with an elevated gradient of overall EphA expression Historically, models of topographic mapping have been based upon the action of molecular activities that promote axon growth. However, with Bonhoeffer's identifi cation in the late 1980s of repellent activities concentrated in posterior chick OT that preferentially affect temporal RGC axons, it became clear that topographic mapping was controlled in a different fashion than previously recognized. These fi ndings eventually resulted in the incorporation of repellent activities into models of topographic mapping, but until recently these models focused on guiding RGC axons to their correct TZ in the target. These models were based upon a gradient determined repulsion, in which an RGC axon would stop its growth when it reaches a threshold level of repulsion found at the AP position of the future TZ Models for A-P mapping in mouse SC and chick OT must explain the topographic bias in the formation of interstitial branches, which arguably is the key feature of A-P map development in warm-blooded vertebrates. Such a model must be able to account for the paucity of branching both posterior and anterior to the appropriate A-P location of the termination zone along each axon. Models that in principle can account for topographic branching have been recently proposed; for example models based upon parallel gradients of a branch repellent (or inhibitory) activity and a branch promoting activity Emerging evidence indicates that the opposing high-to-low A-P repellent gradient, which would serve to prevent branching anterior to the correct termination zone Because ephrin-As are anchored to the cell membrane by a GPI linkage and lack an intracellular domain, to reverse signal they must associate with transmembrane proteins capable of activating intracellular signaling pathways. Such "coreceptors" that mediate the repellent effect of ephrin-A reverse signaling on RGC axons upon binding EphAs are being studied.As described previously, RGC axons enter the OT/ SC with a aberrantly broad distribution along the L-M axis; topographic specifi city along the L-M axis emerges through the bidirectional guidance of interstitial branches that form along RGC axons with an A-P topographic bias Studies of the molecular control of D-V mapping in multiple species (chick, mouse, and frog) independently by the O'Leary and Holt labs have shown roles for EphBs and ephrin-Bs In principle, EphBs and ephrin-B1 could account for D-V mapping through their actions as bifunctional and bidirectional topographic guidance molecules. However, Yimin Zhou has reported that Wnt signaling also is involved in D-V mapping It is well established that neural activity plays an important role in the development of axonal connections in many neural systems including the segregation of RGC axons into eye-specifi c laminae in the lateral geniculate nucleus or eye-specifi c stripes in experimentally created three-eyed frogs (see Similarly, in other species in which the map develops by the direct topographic targeting of RGC axons, such as fi sh and frogs, activity blockade has little affect on topography. For example, RGC axonal arbors are reportedly unaffected in zebrafi sh bathed in either TTX or AP5, and blocking the NMDA class of glutamate receptors in Xenopus results only in a slowing of map development. Even in chicks and rats, in which the early retinotectal projection is topographically very diffuse, a considerable degree of order emerges under pharmacological activity blockade. In chick, TTX and grayanotoxin, which interfere with Na+ currents, prevent the elimination of only a small proportion of overshooting axon segments and aberrant branches and arbors. Similarly, in rats, chronic application to the SC of AP5, an antagonist of the NMDA receptor, at levels that block the activation of SC neurons by RGCs (which use glutamate as their neurotransmitter), also results in the abnormal retention of only a small pro-FIGURE 18.7 Actions and limitations of ephrin-As in retinotectal map development. (A) The top panel schematizes the approximate gradient profi les for EphA receptors and ephrin-A ligands in the chick retina and optic tectum, respectively. RGCs show a high temporal (T) to low nasal (N) gradient of EphA receptor expression, due mainly to EphA3. Ephrin-A2 and ephrin-A5 combine to form a low anterior (A) to high posterior (P) gradient of expression across the tectum. Panels A1-A3 schematize observed and theoretical behaviors of RGC axons. Growth cones stop at A-P positions in the tectum where they reach a threshold level of repellent activation following a mass action law of receptor-ligand interactions. Temporal growth cones, which have high levels of EphA receptors, reach threshold levels of repellent at anterior (A) positions in the tectum, with low levels of ephrin-A ligand. Growth cones from nasal retina (N), which have low levels of EphA receptors, will reach threshold levels of activation at more posterior (P) positions in the tectum. This mechanism can account for the guidance of RGC growth cones to their topographically correct TZ, as is observed in amphibians and fi sh (A1), as well as the position-dependent overshoot of RGC axons, as observed in chicks (A2). However, a single repellent gradient, such as that formed by ephrin-A ligands in the tectum, alone is insuffi cient to generate topographic branching along RGC axons observed in chick (A2). The ephrin-As can inhibit branching along the segment of the overshooting axons posterior to their correct TZ, but anterior to the correct TZ, the level of ephrin-A repellent signal would be below the threshold required to inhibit branching. Thus, if only the tectal ephrin-As regulated branching, all RGC axons should exhibit increased branching at more anterior positions in the tectum, which have the lowest levels of ephrin-A repellent signal (A3). (B) Illustrated are two potential models, among many, that can account for topographic branching along RGC axons. Both models incorporate the graded ephrin-A repellent, and a distinct graded activity that cooperates with it to generate topographic branching. In each case, the ephrin-A repellent prevents branching along the axon shaft posterior to the TZ and the distinct graded activity regulates branching along axons anterior to their TZ. One model includes a distinct repellent in a gradient that opposes the ephrin-A gradient, and acts by inhibiting branching along the axon shaft anterior to the TZ. Thus, branching along the axon shaft occurs at an A-P tectal position below threshold for branch inhibition for both of the repellent signals. Recent fi ndings have indicated that ephrin-A reverse signaling may account for the distinct opposing repellent gradient: ephrin-As expressed by RGCs are the "Distinct receptors" and EphAs expressed in the chick tectum, or mouse superior colliculus, are the "Distinct repellent ligands" depicted in panel B (see text for details). The other model includes a branch promoting activity in a gradient that roughly parallels the ephrin-A gradient. In this model, branching along the axon shaft occurs at an A-P tectal position above threshold for the branch promoting signal, but below threshold for branch inhibition by the ephrin-A repellent signal. Adapted from O'Leary, D. D. M., Yates, P., McLaughlin, T. Cell 96, 255-269.TARGET SELECTION portion of topographically aberrant axons and arbors. These studies, though, have caveats associated with them, including questions about the effectiveness of the block and potential side effects of activity block on gene expression. However, recent analyses of mice lacking cholinergic-mediated retinal waves has circumvented these problems and show that correlated patterns of RGC activity are required for the largescale remodeling of the retinocollicular projection into a refi ned map.Interestingly, the large-scale remodeling of the retinocollicular projection required to generate refi ned topography in the mouse SC occurs well before the onset of visually evoked activity and eye opening. However, this remodeling is coincident with a period of correlated waves of spontaneous neural activity that propagate across the retina, a phenomenon fi rst described by Carla Shatz. These waves are mediated by a network of cholinergic amacrine cells and correlate the activity of neighboring RGCs, thereby relating an RGC's position to its pattern of activity. Mice lacking the b2 subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor maintain normal levels of spontaneous activity, but the correlation in activity patterns among neighboring RGCs is lost. The topographic projection in b2 mutant mice fails to properly refi ne and RGC axons from a given retinal location do not form a dense termination zone but rather maintain a loose collection of diffuse arborizations around the appropriate location of their termination zone ( The formation of topographic maps involves the establishment of an initial, coarse map that subsequently is refi ned. Analysis of the retinotectal system in amphibians, fi sh, birds, and mammals shows that the initial map is formed based on positional information present in the tectum. In birds and mammals, a critical mechanism in map development is the topographic specifi c branching of RGC axons that overshoot their correct termination zone. Topographic guidance information is encoded in the form of gradients of signaling molecules, Ephs and ephrins, along both the A-P and D-V axes of the tectum. Other receptor-ligands systems , as well as patterned RGC activity, are also involved in map development.Once axons have arrived at their appropriate target destination, synapse formation ensues. Much of our understanding about the mechanisms of synapse formation arises from studies of the neuromuscular synapse. These studies have benefi ted from (1) the relative ease of experimentally manipulating developing and regenerating neuromuscular synapses in vivo, (2) cell culture systems for both motor neurons and skeletal muscle cells, (3) the Torpedo electric organ, an abundant and homogeneous source of neuromuscular-like synapses (see Box 18.1), and (4) transgenic and mutant mice for studying and altering gene expression. Consequently, we have a good, although incomplete, understanding of the mechanisms that lead to the formation of the neuromuscular synapse.An adult myofi ber, a syncitial cell containing several hundred to several thousand nuclei, is innervated by a single motor axon that terminates and arborizes over approximately 0.1% of the muscle fi ber's cell surface. The neurotransmitter receptor, acetylcholine receptors (AChRs), is localized to this small patch of the muscle fi ber membrane, and its precise localization to synaptic sites during development is a hallmark of the inductive events of synapse formation. Although other proteins are likewise concentrated at synaptic sites, much of our knowledge about synaptic differentiation has come from studies aimed at understanding how AChRs accumulate at synaptic sites.Nerve terminals are situated in shallow depressions of the muscle cell membrane, which is invaginated further into deep and regular folds, termed postjunctional folds The precise organization of molecules in pre-and postsynaptic membranes belies the concept that the neuromuscular synapse is a simple synapse. Rather, the substructure of pre-and postsynaptic membranes, together with the faithful registration of pre-and postsynaptic specializations, suggests that complex mechanisms are required to assemble the synapse and to coordinate pre-and postsynaptic differentiation.As motor axons extend toward developing muscle, muscle cells are themselves undergoing differentiation. Myotubes, formed by fusion of precursor myoblasts, develop prior to innervation and continue to grow after innervation by further myoblast fusion.FIGURE 18.9 Pre-and postsynaptic membranes at the neuromuscular synapse are highly specialized. (A) An electron micrograph of a neuromuscular synapse shows that the nerve terminal is capped by a Schwann cell and is situated in a shallow depression of the muscle cell membrane, which is invaginated further into deep and regular folds, termed postjunctional folds (arrows). AChRs, labeled with a-bungarotoxin coupled to horseradish peroxidase, are concentrated at the synaptic site. (B) A higher magnifi cation view shows that AChRs are concentrated at the crests and along the sides of the postjunctional folds (white arrow). Rapsyn, NRG receptors, and MuSK are also concentrated in the postsynaptic membrane, whereas Agrin, NRG-1, acetylcholinesterase, S-laminin, and certain isoforms of collagen are localized to the synaptic basal lamina. The postjunctional folds of the myofi ber are spaced at regular intervals and are situated directly across from active zones and clusters of synaptic vesicles in the nerve terminal (arrows).Because myoblasts fuse to developing myotubes at their growing ends, the central region of the muscle is more mature than the distal ends of the muscle. Recent studies have shown that the central region of muscle is regionally specialized prior to innervation. For example, AChRs are already clustered in the central region of the muscle prior to and independent of innervation How the prospective synaptic region of the muscle becomes prepatterned is not well understood, but muscle prepatterning restricts motor axon growth and promotes synapse formation in the central region of mammalian muscle Following contact with the growth cone of a developing motor neuron, developing muscle fi bers undergo a still further complex differentiation program in the synaptic region, which is dependent upon motor neuron-derived signals. In addition, signals from the muscle further regulate differentiation of presynaptic nerve terminals. The idea that signals for regulating both presynaptic and postsynaptic differentiation are contained in the synaptic basal lamina arose from studies of regenerating neuromuscular synapses. Following damage to a motor axon, the distal portion of the motor axon degenerates, and the proximal end regenerates to muscle. The regenerated axon precisely reinnervates the original synaptic site and forms a synapse that is indistinguishable from the original synapse. Original synaptic sites are not thought to provide guidance cues to motor axons; rather, it is believed that the vacated perineurial tubes, containing Schwann cells and their basal lamina, provide a favorable substrate for motor axons and have a role in directing regenerating motor axons to original synaptic sites (Son and Following damage to motor axons and muscle, nerve terminals and muscle fi bers degenerate and are phagocytized, but the basal lamina of the muscle fi ber remains intact. Even in the absence of nerve terminals and muscle fi bers, several structures, including the terminal Schwann cells, the basal lamina of the postjunctional folds, and AChE, remain at the original synaptic site and allow for its identifi cation.Axons eventually regenerate into the muscle, and new myofi bers regenerate within the basal lamina of the original myofi ber. The regenerated motor axons form synapses with the regenerated myofi bers precisely at the original synaptic sites. If axons regenerate into muscle, but muscle regeneration is prevented, axons still unerringly reinnervate the original synaptic site on the basal lamina, and active zones form in register with the basal lamina of the original postjunctional folds If regeneration of motor axons is prevented, but myofi bers are allowed to regenerate, AChRs accumulate and membrane folds form in the regenerated myofi ber precisely at the original synaptic site on the basal lamina Because clustering of AChRs, unlike the formation of active zones, can be studied readily in cell culture, it has been far simpler to identify the basal lamina signals that induce postsynaptic rather than presynaptic differentiation. Extracellular matrix from the Torpedo electric organ, a tissue that is homologous to muscle but more densely innervated, contains an activity that stimulates AChR clustering in cultured myotubes (see Box 18.1). McMahan and colleagues purifi ed the electric organ activity, which they termed Agrin, and showed that Agrin is synthesized by motor neurons, transported in motor axons to synaptic sites, and deposited in the synaptic basal lamina. Agrin also stimulates the clustering of other synaptic proteins (see later), including AChE, Rapsyn and Utrophin (see later), indicating that Agrin has a central role in synaptic differentiation.Agrin is a ∼200-kDa protein containing multiple epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like signaling domains, The majority of proteins known to be localized to neuromuscular synapses were fi rst identifi ed in postsynaptic membranes isolated from the electric organ of the marine ray Torpedo. Indeed, this specialized tissue has been essential for the identifi cation and purifi cation of the AChR, AChE, Rapsyn, Syntrophin, Agrin, MuSK and several synaptic vesicle proteins. The electric organ is a particularly homogeneous and abundant source of pre-and postsynaptic membranes that are similar in structure and function to those at neuromuscular synapses. The biochemical advantages of the electric organ are evident from its anatomy. The postsynaptic cell, which differentiates initially as a syncitial skeletal muscle fi ber but subsequently loses its contractile machinery, is termed an electroplaque. Each electroplaque is a thin, elongated cell (1 cm × 1 cm × 10 mm) that is so densely innervated that nearly one-half of the electrocyte membrane is studded by nerve terminals. In contrast, nerve terminals occupy less than 0.1% of the cell surface of a skeletal myofi ber.Because of this dense innervation and because the electric organ from a moderate size ray weighs several kilograms, it is possible to obtain several mg of purifi ed postsynaptic proteins from a single electric organ.Innervation is restricted to the ventral surface of the electroplaque, whereas the dorsal surface is enriched for the sodium/potassium ATPase which maintains the resting potential. Because the electroplaque lacks action potentials, activation of AChRs on the innervated ventral surface results in a voltage drop across the innervated but not the non-innervated membrane of the electrocyte. Since thousands of electroplaques are stacked closely one upon another, the potential difference across a single electrocyte is summated by the stack of electroplaques, resulting in a several thousand volt potential difference across the entire electric organ, a voltage that is suffi cient to stun prey.BOX 18.1III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT two different laminin-like domains, and multiple follistatin-like repeats. The four EGF-like domains and three laminin G domains are contained in the carboxylterminal region, which is suffi cient for inducing AChR clusters in cultured myotubes; sequences in the aminoterminal region are responsible for the association of Agrin with the extracellular matrix.The agrin gene is expressed in a variety of cell types. Alternative splicing results in multiple Agrin isoforms that differ in their AChR clustering effi ciency. The isoform that is most active in clustering AChRs is expressed in neurons, including motor neurons, whereas other Agrin isoforms are expressed in additional cell types, including skeletal muscle cells. The active, neuronal-specifi c isoforms of Agrin contain 8, 11, or 19 amino acids at a splice site, referred to as the Z site in rat Agrin and the B site in chick Agrin.The agrin gene contains multiple promoters. Although the promoter used in motor neurons leads to expression of isoforms that are associated with the extracellular matrix, the promoter used in the CNS leads to expression of membrane-bound isoforms In mice lacking Agrin, AChRs are initially prepatterned, and synapses appear to form, but only transiently The mechanisms of Agrin-mediated AChR clustering are not known, but a receptor tyrosine kinase, termed MuSK, is a critical component of an Agrin receptor complex. MuSK is expressed in Torpedo electric organ and in skeletal muscle, where it is concentrated in the postsynaptic membrane. Mice defi cient in MuSK Five lines of evidence indicate that MuSK is required for Agrin-mediated signaling and is a component of the Agrin receptor complex: (1) Agrin can be chemically cross-linked to MuSK in cultured myotubes; (2) Agrin induces rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of MuSK in cultured myotubes; (3) a recombinant, soluble extracellular fragment of MuSK inhibits Agrin-induced AChR clustering in cultured muscle cells; (4) cultured MuSK mutant muscle cells, unlike normal muscle cells, do not cluster AChRs in response to Agrin; and (5) dominant-negative forms of MuSK inhibit Agrininduced AChR clustering in cultured myotubes. MuSK itself, however, does not bind Agrin, indicating that other activities or additional proteins are required for Agrin to activate MuSK. The additional activities in muscle that are required for Agrin to activate MuSK are not known, but Lrp4, a member of the low density lipoprotein receptor family, is essential for synapse formation, and the synaptic defects in lrp4 mutant mice appear identical to those in MuSK mutant mice Interestingly, a pair of proteins with homology to MuSK and Lrp4 are required for clustering AChRs at C. elegans neuromuscular synapses: CAM-1, a receptor tyrosine kinase that shares homology with MuSK, and LEV-10, a transmembrane protein that contains a LDLa domain The signaling mechanisms that regulate neuromuscular synapse formation during embryogenesis in Drosophila are poorly understood, but two ligands, Wingless and TGF-b, unrelated to Agrin, are involved in the growth of Drosophila neuromuscular synapses during larval development. Wingless is secreted by motor neurons and thought to activate Frizzled-2, a Wingless receptor expressed in muscle How does MuSK activation lead to postsynaptic differentiation? Agrin stimulates the rapid phosphorylation of MuSK, and the kinase activity of MuSK is essential for Agrin to stimulate clustering and tyrosine phosphorylation of AChRs. Signaling downstream from MuSK depends on phosphorylation of a tyrosine residue (Y553) in the juxtamembrane region of MuSK Following the recruitment of Dok-7 to phosphorylated MuSK, the signaling pathways downstream from MuSK are poorly understood. Abl 1/2, Src-family kinases and Pak have been proposed to act downstream from MuSK, but functional evidence for Abl and Pak in forming synapses in vivo is currently lacking. Genetics studies point to a role for Src-family kinases, as well as dystrobrevin, in stabilizing rather than forming neuromuscular synapses, but how these kinases stabilize synapses is not known The preceding sections have emphasized the role of muscle prepatterning and motor neuron-derived signals in regulating the distribution of AChR expression. Taken together, these fi ndings suggest a model for the sequential steps involved in establishing the pattern of AChR expression on developing skeletal muscle fi bers A 43-kDa protein, termed Rapsyn, has an important role in Agrin-mediated signaling. Rapsyn is a myristolated, peripheral membrane protein that is present at 1 : 1 stoichiometry with AChRs at synaptic sites and interacts directly with AChRs and potentially other synaptic proteins, including Dystroglycan and Dystrophin, Utrophin, Syntrophin, and Dystrobrevin, proteins that are components of a subsynaptic, cytoskeletal complex.Agrin stimulates the clustering of Rapsyn in myotubes grown in cell culture, and clustering of Rapsyn and AChRs occurs coincidentally at developing synapses. Rapsyn is critical for synapse formation, as mice DEVELOPMENT OF THE NEUROMUSCULAR SYNAPSE 423 FIGURE 18.12 Presynaptic and postsynaptic differentiation are defective in mice lacking MuSK. Whole mounts of muscle from wildtype and MuSK mutant mice were stained with antibodies to neurofi lament (NF) and synaptophysin (Syn) to label motor axons and nerve terminals (green), respectively, and with a-bungarotoxin to label acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) (red). In MuSK mutant mice, motor axons fail to stop and differentiate adjacent to the main intramuscular nerve and instead wander aimlessly over the muscle; AChRs, as well as other postsynaptic proteins, are expressed at normal levels but they fail to cluster.lacking Rapsyn die within hours after birth and have diffi culty moving and breathing Although pathfi nding of motor axons to muscle is normal in mice lacking Agrin or MuSK, agrin and MuSK mutant mice lack normal nerve terminals. In the mutant mice, branches of the main intramuscular nerve fail to stop and differentiate and instead wander aimlessly across the muscle Like AChR protein, mRNAs encoding the different AChR subunits (a, b, g, or e and d) are concentrated at synaptic sites. Studies with transgenic mice that harbor gene fusions between regulatory regions of AChR subunit genes and reporter genes have shown that AChR genes are transcribed selectively in myofi ber nuclei near the synaptic site Like AChR subunit genes, the utrophin gene is transcribed selectively in synaptic nuclei, resulting in an accumulation of utrophin mRNA and protein at synaptic sites. mRNAs encoding Rapsyn, NCAM, MuSK, sodium channels, the catalytic subunit of AChE, LL5beta and CD24 are also concentrated in the synaptic region of skeletal myofi bers, raising the possibility that these genes are likewise transcribed preferentially in synaptic nuclei. Thus, synapse-specifi c transcription may be a common and important mechanism for expressing and localizing a variety of gene products at high levels at the neuromuscular synapse.The neural signals that regulate synapse-specifi c transcription remain elusive. Until recently, Neuregulin-1, which stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of ErbB2, a member of the EGF receptor family, was considered the best candidate. However, neuromuscular synapses appear normal in mice lacking ErbBs in skeletal mice as well as in mice lacking Neuregulin-1 in motor neurons and skeletal muscle A binding site for Ets domain proteins in the AChR d subunit gene is critical for synapse-specifi c gene expression in mice. Importantly, mutation of an Ets-binding site in the human AChR e subunit gene leads to a myopathy, termed congenital myasthenic syndrome, due to decreased AChR expression. This Ets site can bind GABP, a complex containing GABPa, an Ets protein, and GABPb, a protein that lacks an Ets domain but dimerizes with GABPa, suggesting that GABP may be a transcriptional regulator that stimulates transcription of AChR genes in synaptic nuclei. In addition, the gene encoding another Ets domain protein, Erm, is expressed selectively by myofi ber synaptic nuclei Changes in the pattern of muscle electrical activity have an important role in regulating the electrophysiological and structural properties of muscle, as well as the ability of motor axons to innervate muscle. The expression of several genes, including AChR genes, is repressed by electrical activity, and this repression, together with focal activation in synaptic nuclei, as described earlier, contributes to the disparate levels of AChR expression in synaptic and nonsynaptic regions of the muscle. A binding site for myogenic bHLH transcription factors, or E box, in the proximal promoter of AChR subunit genes is essential for electrical activitydependent transcription, as transgenes containing a mutation in this E box, unlike wild-type transgenes, are not induced following denervation. These results suggest that electrical activity decreases the level and/ or activity of E box binding proteins, notably Myogenin, leading to decreased AChR expression. The transcriptional mechanisms that control expression of myogenin in an activity-dependent manner are just beginning to be explored. Electrical activity induces expression of two transcriptional repressors, HDAC-9 (aka MITR) and Dach2, which act to repress myogenin expression Signals exchanged at nascent synaptic sites ensure that differentiated presynaptic terminals are aligned precisely with a highly specialized postsynaptic membrane. Analysis of mice lacking innervation demonstrates that a coarse pattern of postsynaptic differentiation is present prior to innervation and that neuronal signals, including Agrin, selectively maintain, rather than induce, postsynaptic differentiation at sites of nerve-muscle contact Compared to synapse formation between neurons and muscle cells, we know only relatively little about how neuron-neuron synapses in the central nervous system are put together. The reason for this lack of knowledge is the complexity of the problem. CNS synapses are much smaller (about one hundredths of a neuromuscular junction), a single neuron typically receives hundreds to thousands of synapses and the synaptic inputs are derived from multiple different synaptic partners. Finally, these synapses employ not just one but a variety of neurotransmitters, some excitatory that depolarize the postsynaptic partner, and some that are inhibitory and lead to hyper-polarization. The placement of excitatory and inhibitory synapses on the postsynaptic cell is a critical parameter for integration of these counteracting inputs. Another complicating factor is that the synaptic connectivity in the central nervous system is not static but undergoes extensive plastic changes that modify the function of neuronal circuits in response to experience. All of these properties pose intriguing challenges regarding the synthesis of synaptic components, their targeting and assembly at functionally distinct synaptic sites, and the recognition of the appropriate synaptic partners in a sea of candidate partners within the target area.While the assembly of the vertebrate neuromuscular junction represents a much simpler problem there are several principles discovered in work on the NMJ that appear to apply to CNS synapse formation: (1) Cells express most synaptic components before synapse formation, (2) bi-directional signaling organizes synaptic components at emerging synaptic contacts, (3) synapses undergo extensive functional maturation, (4) during development an exuberant number of synaptic contacts is formed, some of which later undergo elimination.Building on these parallels to NMJ formation signifi cant progress in understanding CNS synapse formation has been made. Other invaluable information for these studies has come from the previous elucidation of the molecular composition of pre-and postsynaptic structures (Chapters 8 and 9) and the recent advances in understanding the mechanisms of synaptic plasticity of mature synapses (Chapters 50 and 51), some of which are likely to be also important for their initial formation. This section focuses on the formation of chemical synapses between neurons in the central nervous system of vertebrates. It examines emerging evidence on the mechanisms controlling recruitment and assembly of pre-and postsynaptic components and discusses some candidate molecules that may contribute to the selectivity of synaptic wiring in development.Neurons express both pre-and postsynaptic components prior to synapse formation. For example, growing axons and growth cones contain synaptic vesicles and release neurotransmitter before interacting with a postsynaptic target cell. Similarly, target cells express functional neurotransmitter receptors on their surface before synapse formation. Cell-cell contact, however, is essential for the concentration and juxtaposition of pre-and postsynaptic components in opposing membranes and for achieving the mature complement of both pre-and postsynaptic proteins.Many initial contacts between synaptic partners are established through fi lopodia, tiny membrane extensions that rapidly extend and retract from a cell (Chapter 17). Importantly, fi lopodia extend from both, axons and dendrites and increase the extracellular space sampled by a cell during development A second important realization from imaging studies has been that the assembly of synapses occurs very rapidly. The time required from initial contact to establishment of a functional synapse is only in the range of 1-2 hours, with the formation of a presynaptic terminal occurring in only 10-20 minutes and the recruitment of postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors lagging somewhat behind What are the trans-synaptic interactions that mediate the stabilization of fi lopodial contacts and rapid recruitment of presynaptic components? A striking realization emerging during the past years has been that single target-derived signals are suffi cient to induce a substantial degree of presynaptic organization. The fi rst proteins with such an activity to be identifi ed were the neuroligins. Neuroligins are a small family of postsynaptic adhesion molecules that can bind to neurexins, a second family of neuronal receptors, that is present on axons How might adhesion molecules on the postsynaptic cell induce presynaptic development? For neuroligins, presynaptic induction is mediated by recruitment and local aggregation of neurexins that act as a neuroligin receptor. Neurexins bind intracellularly to several cytoplasmic scaffolding molecules including Mint/ Lin-10 and CASK/Lin-2, which may couple neurexins to voltage-gated calcium channels at the active zone Additional studies identifi ed secreted growth factors that might act as target-derived signals upstream of synaptogenic cell-adhesion molecules. Using the cerebellar mossy fi ber-granule cell synapse as a model system, Salinas and co-workers showed that WNT-7a derived from granule cells can induce the characteristic spreading of pontine mossy fi ber axon terminals in vitro properties and promotes axonal branching. These morphological rearrangements could shape the presynaptic partner and facilitate the recruitment of appropriate organelles in response to trans-synaptic adhesion molecules.NMJs and central synapses differ most dramatically in their postsynaptic structures. This is not surprising considering the difference in cell type of the postsynaptic cell, neurons in the CNS versus muscle cells at the NMJ. While the cleft of neuron-neuron synapses is fi lled with proteinaceous and carbohydrate material it does not contain a thick basal lamina like the one seen at the NMJ. With 20 nm, the width of the synaptic cleft is much narrower and the postsynaptic membrane is closely apposed to the presynaptic active zone, lacking the junctional infoldings of the NMJ. Despite these substantial differences, both synapses share the accumulation of postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors as the hallmark of postsynaptic differentiation.Excitatory neuron-neuron synapses using the transmitter glutamate contain multiple types of neurotransmitter receptors. So-called metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) that couple to G-proteins and modulate synaptic function and the ionotropic NMDAand AMPA-type receptors that carry ion currents for synaptic transmission which depolarize and excite the postsynaptic cell. During development NMDA-and AMPA-receptors are thought to be recruited to synapses in a stepwise manner, with an initial accumulation of NMDA receptors at postsynaptic sites and the subsequent addition of AMPA receptors. This view is supported both by electron microscopy using immunogold labeling and by electrophysiology in which NDMA receptor-rich "silent synapses" are identifi ed initially in development and the AMPA-receptor content increases at later stages.How can postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors be recruited to a newly forming neuron-neuron contact? One model for neurotransmitter recruitment in analogy to the NMJ is that trans-synaptic signals could recruit a rapsyn-like cytoplasmic protein that provides a scaffold underneath the postsynaptic membrane. This scaffold would then also interact with postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors and selectively retain receptor molecules at the appropriate sites. Biochemical studies have identifi ed a vast array of such scaffolding proteins, many of which contain multiple protein-protein interaction domains and are ideally suited to cross-link multiple postsynaptic membrane proteins into a larger macro-molecular complex In a complex with another postsynaptic protein called stargazin, PSD-95 has also been implicated in synaptic recruitment of AMPA-type glutamate receptors. Mice lacking the stargazin protein have severely reduced AMPA-receptor currents in cerebellar granule cells . Stargazin itself is a membrane protein that co-assembles with AMPAreceptors in the endoplasmic reticulum. Upon transport to the cell surface, PSD-95 might then capture these AMPA-receptor-stargazin complexes at glutamatergic synapses.The concept that scaffolding molecules contribute to the clustering of postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors applies to both, excitatory and inhibitory synapses. Importantly, these synapses differ not only in their neurotransmitter receptors but also in their scaffolding proteins. In fact, the scaffolding molecules may ensure that the appropriate neurotransmitter receptors are selectively recruited to excitatory and inhibitory synapses, respectively. The scaffolding protein gephyrin represents one of the best-understood examples for the scaffold-mediated postsynaptic receptor clustering at inhibitory synapses. A host of studies, including mouse knockouts, demonstrates that gephyrin, a cytoplasmic protein associated with the glycine receptor, is essential for receptor clustering at synaptic sites Work on glycine receptor transport also uncovered another key mechanism for regulating neurotransmitter receptor recruitment to synapses, namely that the function of the receptor itself can regulate its concentration at synapses. Pharmacological blockade of glycine receptors with strychnine or the blockade of sodium channel dependent action potentials with tetrodotoxin (TTX) prevents postsynaptic accumulation of the receptors. Further studies on the activity-dependent glycine receptor clustering at synapses indicate that calcium infl ux is essential for clustering, possibly by initiating a calcium-activated signaling cascade in the cytoplasm A second mechanism for the recruitment of postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors that is independent of scaffolding molecules is the direct interaction of membrane and secreted proteins with the extracellular domain of neurotransmitter receptors. Receptor tyrosine kinases of the EphB-family and their cognate ligands, called ephrinB proteins, were shown to form a tripartite complex with NMDA receptors Notably, EphB-receptors had been initially recognized for their critical roles in axon guidance and topographic mapping and in the past years novel synaptic functions have also emerged for other axon guidance receptors. This suggests that many of the proteins that function in axon guidance also contribute to synapse formation. Notably, in many cases the signaling readout downstream of these receptors differs at the different steps of neural development: many receptors that mediate repulsive signaling during axon guidance have adhesive and stabilizing functions at synapses. How this functional switch is achieved is an important focus of ongoing work.Besides Eph-receptors there are additional proteins that contribute to the synaptic clustering neurotransmitter receptors through extracellular interactions. One of these factors is the protein Narp Understanding how synaptic activity infl uences the formation and stabilization of synapses is an area of intense study. During development, each axon comes into contact with a large number of potential synaptic partners but the fi nal connectivity pattern is remarkably selective. In the section on topographic mapping above we already discussed two principle mechanisms that might underlie selective interactions during development: Sperry's chemo-affi nity hypothesis which suggested that molecular recognition labels specify the positioning and connectivity of neurons and Paul Weiss' hypothesis that neuronal activity would provide instructive information on which neurons are wired into a functional circuit. The essence of both of these hypotheses, put forward more than 50 years ago, is still very much alive and ongoing studies continue to identify wiring decisions that require synaptic activity or cell surface recognition molecules that might act as chemoaffi nity tags.It should be noted that there is evidence that synaptic activity is not absolutely required for the formation of synaptic structures during development. Ablation of Munc18-1, a key component of the presynaptic release machinery results in a complete loss of synaptic transmission but Munc18-1 knock-out mice form synaptic structures. Neurons of the null mutants fail to display evoked and spontaneous transmitter release, thereby resulting in a complete loss of synaptic transmission. Munc18-1 null mutants display apparently normal brain development during embryonic stages Another approach to understanding activity-dependent mechanisms of synapse formation has been to search for proteins that are specifi cally up-or downregulated by synaptic activity. In fact, NARP, the secreted protein discussed above that clusters AMPA receptors was originally identifi ed in such a screen based on its upregulation with strong synaptic stimulation. Another particularly, intriguing example of an activity-induced gene is CGP15, a small cell surface protein that is upregulated by activity in adult hippocampus Many additional activity-induced genes have been identifi ed and the analysis of their regulation and function is likely to yield important new insights into the mechanisms of synapse formation.Understanding the molecular mechanisms of synaptic specifi city is arguably the most exciting and important unresolved question in the fi eld of CNS synaptogenesis. A leading model is that selective transsynaptic interactions are achieved by an adhesive code. Such a code could be generated by matching expression of adhesion molecules in the pre-and postsynaptic partners that underlie a key-lock mechanism for selective interactions. The fi rst proteins for which such a function was proposed are the cadherins, a family of homophilic adhesion molecules The laminar organization of the visual system has also lent itself for studies on synaptic specifi city in vertebrates. Sanes and colleagues discovered a family of proteins called Sidekicks which mediate homophilic binding Another recent exciting discovery with potentially important implications for synaptic specifi city was the identifi cation of several neuronal cell surface protein families that encode hundreds or even thousands of different isoforms. The best characterized of these polymorphic surface molecules in vertebrates are related to cadherins and were initially named cadherin-related neuronal receptors (CNRs) but are now primarily referred to as protocadherins Two families with even higher molecular diversity than protocadherins are DSCAM and the neurexins. Like for the protocadherins, diversity is generated through a combination of expression form multiple genes and alternative splicing. In Drosophila, alternative splicing generates 38,016 DSCAM variants. Remarkably, all variants tested so far engage in exclusively homophilic binding, that means the DSCAM variants theoretically have the ability to encode thousands of specifi c cell recognition events Vertebrate neurexins encode nearly 4,000 isoforms and as observed for protocadherins and DSCAM the sequence diversity of neurexins is primarily found in their extracellular domains An important conclusion derived from the characterization of the protocadherin, DSCAM, and neurexin gene families is that anatomically apparently identical cells often express different cell surface recognition molecules. This implies that within one anatomically defi ned cell population there might be subpopulations containing different cell surface recognition markers. While we are only beginning to understand the functional relevance of these highly diverse gene families their analysis should provide important new insights into the organization and function of neuronal networks.The diversity of synapses found in the nervous system is likely to be matched by an equally diverse array of mechanisms producing the synapses. These mechanisms are only now beginning to be elucidated. Prime candidates at present for synaptogenic roles include transmembrane proteins interacting with cognate receptors on the apposing cell surface (e.g., neuroligin/β-neurexin; SynCAM; ephrinB/EphB receptors), diffusible molecules that instruct synaptic development in target cells (e.g., FGF22, WNT-7a) or interact directly with synaptic components (e.g., Narp), membrane-attached components that act to promote maturation both pre-and postsynaptically (e.g., CPG15), and intracellular components that act locally to organize synaptic constituents (e.g., gephyrin). Testing the effects of such components in vivo will be a high priority in the near term. Neuronal activity is also important for certain aspects of synapse formation, but exactly how it participates and whether it employs mechanisms shared with those governing synaptic plasticity remain intriguing questions. Finally, we are beginning to identify molecular families (e.g., protocadherins and neurexins) that may contribute to FIGURE 18.17 Model for lamina-specifi c synaptic connectivity through homophilic adhesion molecules. Pre-and postsynaptic partners express the same homophilic adhesion molecules and thereby preferentially form synapses with each other. In this example, subsets of amacrine and bipolar cells in the inner nuclear layer express different isoforms of the protein Sidekick (sdk-1 or sdk-2) and form lamina-specifi c synaptic connections on the dendrites of sdk-1 or sdk-2-positive ganglion cells, respectively. The layered organization of the inner plexiform layer (sublaminae S1-S5) is an excellent system for the analysis of this type of synaptic specifi city. In principle, other homophilic adhesion molecules such as cadherins with corresponding expression in pre-and postsynaptic partners may function in a similar manner. Adapted from One of the hallmarks of embryonic development is the enormous production of new cells and the acquisition of new cellular and morphological properties (phenotypes). Accordingly, in the past, a major focus of developmental neurobiologists has been the study of these progressive events, including proliferation and migration (Chapter 15), determination and differentiation (Chapter 16), pathway formation (Chapter 17), and synaptogenesis (Chapter 18). In this context, the concept of signifi cant regressive events, such as programmed cell death (PCD), occurring during development, initially was considered counterintuitive Both progressive and regressive events during development are regulated by intercellular signals. Somewhat surprisingly, many of the same intercellular signals (e.g., NTFs) that contribute to the regulation of progressive events during nervous system development (cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, axonal and dendritic growth, synaptogenesis, synaptic plasticity) also contribute to the control of regressive events (cell death/survival, axon collateral and synapse elimination, dendritic pruning). Neurotrophic factors are now appreciated for their role in survival-as well as nonsurvival-related activities in both developing and mature nervous systems where they play important roles in the regulation of activity-dependent anatomical and functional plasticity of the nervous system. Accordingly, we include here a review of both survival and nonsurvival functions of NTFs.Because neurons may die for a variety of reasons and in many different situations, it is important to describe the type of cell death observed most often in the developing nervous system. Although the loss of cells during normal development has been called by many different names (normal cell death, spontaneous cell death, naturally occurring cell death, and developmental cell death), this chapter uses the term programmed cell death (PCD). PCD is defi ned as the spatially and temporally reproducible and species-specifi c loss of large numbers of individual cells during development. Accidental, injury-induced, Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition 437 pathological, and disease-related forms of cell death are not included even though we recognize that the biochemical and molecular mechanisms used to kill cells in these situations may overlap with those involved in developmental PCD. This defi nition of PCD also makes no a priori assumptions about either the morphological or the biochemical pathways by which cells die or the stimuli that trigger cell death. The use of the word "programmed" refers to the reproducible, spatiotemporally specifi c occurrence of cell loss and is not meant to imply that the cell loss is genetically predetermined, inherited from precursor cells, or inevitable. In fact, PCD is clearly not predetermined in most cases, but instead is critically dependent on extrinsic signals arising from diverse kinds of cellular interactions. Finally, and as we discuss in more detail later, the term PCD is not synonymous with the term apoptosis, which refers only to one specifi c, albeit common, mode of cell death.Early embryological studies of the interactions between developing neurons and their peripheral targets laid the foundation for the discovery of cell death and NTFs By 1949, Viktor Hamburger and Rita LeviMontalcini had provided compelling evidence to support the signifi cance of normal embryonic neuronal death and postulated that target-derived signals act to regulate the number of neurons that survive embryonic development. In subsequent studies, they and their colleagues identifi ed a specifi c protein, nerve growth factor (NGF), that infl uenced development of the same populations of neurons (sensory and sympathetic) that their earlier studies had suggested were regulated by target-derived signals By 1960, the preparation of specifi c antibodies that block NGF activity allowed Stanley Cohen, LeviMontalcini, and coinvestigators to demonstrate the almost total degeneration of sympathetic ganglia in vivo following the specifi c deprivation of NGF activity ( PCD has been identifi ed in several species of unicellular eukaryotes, including yeast, as well as in prokaryotes such as bacteria, one of the oldest forms of life on FIGURE 19.1 The neurotrophic hypothesis postulates that developing neurons survive (green neurons) only when they successfully compete for target-derived trophic molecules (blue) that are internalized at the nerve terminal and are transported retrogradely along the axon (arrow) to the cell body. Neurons that fail to obtain a suffi cient fl ow of trophic molecules from the target die by programmed cell death (black neurons with condensed chromatin). Modifi ed from Levi-Montalcini and Levi showed that early limb bud removal reduced the number of sensory and motor neurons and proposed that the hypothetical target-derived signals act to maintain the survival of differentiating neurons.Levi-Montalcini and Hamburger carried out transplantation experiments with a tumor, sarcoma 180, and discovered that sympathetic and sensory ganglia remote from the tumor and not connected with it by nerve fi bers were also enlarged greatly. This suggested involvement of a diffusible factor.Levi-Montalcini, Meyer, and Hamburger developed an in vitro assay that used explanted sympathetic ganglia. Ganglia cocultured with fragments of tumor cells lacking any physical contacts between the two exhibited massive outgrowth of nerve fi bers ( Cohen discovered that the salivary gland of male mice was an extremely rich source of the same growth-promoting activity found in the sarcoma 180. When an antiserum to the mouse factor was injected into newborn mice, all sympathetic neurons were lost.Bocchini and P. Angeletti described a method for the purifi cation of biologically active NGF from male mouse submaxillary glands. This activity is the b subunit of NGF, also known as 2.5S NGF. It has been estimated that to purify NGF from relevant target organs would have required a purifi cation factor of 100 million, whereas a purifi cation factor of only 100-200 was suffi cient to purify NGF from the mouse salivary gland. Salivary glands from female mice or other mammals do not contain this extremely high concentration of NGF.P. Angeletti and Bradshaw identifi ed the amino acid sequence of 2.5S NGF purifi ed from the mouse submaxillary gland.Barde and colleagues isolated a novel neurotrophic factor from the mammalian brain (brain-derived neurotrophic factor) (BDNF). Unlike the original purifi cation of NGF from a fortuitous rich source-the salivary gland-this factor was isolated from many brains by an amazing purifi cation factor of several millionfold. BDNF was identifi ed and isolated using an in vitro survival assay with sensory neurons.Korsching and Thoenen developed a sensitive two-site immunoassay, allowing for the fi rst time the detection of NGF in target organs. With this method it was possible to demonstrate a strong correlation between the density of sympathetic innervation and target levels of NGF, a fi nding consistent with the neurotrophic theory.Chao and his colleagues identifi ed the fi rst neurotrophin receptor, at the time believed to be a receptor specifi c for NGF. The Nobel Prize in medicine was awarded to Levi-Montalcini and Cohen for the discovery of NGF and EGF.The sequencing and molecular cloning of BDNF by Barde and colleagues revealed a high degree of sequence homology between the new factor and NGF. This fi nding enabled the rapid molecular cloning and sequencing of other related neurotrophins containing the conserved regions without prior protein purifi cation. These and related studies on the characterization of neurotrophins were carried out by several prominent researchers trained in Eric Shooter's lab or in Hans Thoenen's lab during the 1980s.Several groups discovered additional members of the "neurotrophin" family by molecular cloning, including NT-3 (in several species), NT-4 (in Xenopus), and NT-5 (in mammals). Research by Kaplan, Parada, and colleagues identifi ed the trk receptor (an "orphan" receptor) as a member of a family of tyrosine kinase receptors that are specifi c for neurotrophins, rapidly leading to the identifi cation of the three members trkA (for NGF), trkB (for BDNF and NT-4), and trkC (for NT-3).Poo and his colleagues discovered that the neurotrophins BDNF and NT-3 have rapid and substantial effects on the strength of synapses, showing for the fi rst time that neurotrophins have important effects in regulating synaptic plasticity.Work by Barde and his colleagues revealed that neurotrophins can induce cell death (apoptosis) by binding to the "common" neurotrophin receptor, p75NTR.Hempstead and her colleagues discovered that proneurotrophins, the larger precursor forms believed to have no signifi cant biological function, have important physiological effects.*For references cited in this table, see Although this important paper by Levi-Montalcini and Levi was published in 1942, Hamburger fi rst saw it after World War II. Intrigued by the novel interpretation, in 1946 he invited Levi-Montalcini to join him in St. Louis to resolve their differences. She accepted and by 1947 they had begun experiments that resulted in their fi rst joint publication in 1949. This paper, which soon became a landmark in the history of this fi eld, fully vindicated the original conclusion of Levi-Montalcini and Levi that regression and cell death, not the failure of recruitment, correctly explained the results of the limb removal experiments. More importantly, this same paper showed that many neurons normally die during development and that a major effect of altering target size is the perturbation of this normal regressive process. They proposed that both normal cell death and death following limb removal result from a lack of target-derived substances necessary for growth and survival. A year later, they used the term trophic or neurotrophic to designate these hypothetical signals or substances. In this context, "trophic" and "neurotrophic" refer to signals that mediate long-term dependencies between neurons and the cells they innervate (e.g., survival) and are distinct from "tropic" and "neurotropic," which refer to diffusible chemoattractant signals derived from target cells that guide or orient the migration of other cells or cell processes (e.g., axons) toward the target. By 1950, therefore, the basic tenets of what was subsequently called the trophic theory were established: developing neurons are overproduced and compete for limiting amounts of target-derived molecules that provide retrograde signal(s) for their survival. Despite this early conceptual breakthrough it would be more than 30 years before convincing evidence in support of all the tenets of the trophic theory was available.Historically, the prospect of large losses of cells during normal development was conceptually unpalatable to most biologists. Early in the 20 th century, German anatomists M. Ernst and A. Glücksmann and the French anatomist R. Collin described widespread cell death in the nervous system, but their observations either went unrecognized or were ignored by other investigators of this period. For this reason, the description of normal neuronal death and its proposed role in neuron-target interactions by Hamburger and Levi-Montalcini marked a watershed in the history of this fi eld. Although it would be many more years before cell death was fully accepted as a fundamental process in nervous system development, after 1949 it was no longer possible to exclude it completely from consideration in discussions of the development of neuron-target interactions. Additionally, for the fi rst time it also became possible to conceive of chemical substances (trophic factors) as the source of signals that regulate developmental events in the nervous system such as neuronal survival. Therefore, although Hamburger and Levi-Montalcini were not the fi rst to observe normal cell death in the nervous system, they were the fi rst to draw attention to its signifi cance; they were the fi rst to provide a plausible explanation for its occurrence; and they were the fi rst to postulate a possible mechanism for its regulation. For these reasons, they deserve equal credit along with Collin, Ernst, and Glücksmann as pioneers in the history of this fi eld. Although a systematic taxonomic survey of all representative species with a nervous system has not been done, nonetheless, the available evidence is consistent with the idea that some PCD of developing neurons occurs in all such organisms III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT sis (e.g., the Rohon-Beard sensory neurons in fi sh and frogs), most or all cells die. Cell death in the nervous system thus clearly occurs on a very large scale, indicating that it plays a fundamental and essential role in normal development.Studies of cell death in the nervous system have focused on the loss of developing postmitotic neurons as they form synaptic connections with targets and afferents. However, extensive PCD also occurs during neurulation and in mitotically active progenitor cells, as well as in postmitotic but undifferentiated neurons in the early neural tube Because PCD is the normal differentiated or terminal fate of many developing cells, commitment to this fate occurs in much the same way as the phenotypic fate of cells destined to survive in the embryo. Developmental biologists have identifi ed two major ways in which the commitment of a cell to a particular differentiated phenotype occurs The PCD of developing neurons appears to occur in virtually all vertebrate and invertebrate species. More generally, PCD also occurs in many different cells and tissues of unicellular and multicellular organisms and thus may have arisen very early during evolution. With few exceptions, PCD occurs in virtually all types of developing neurons and can take place at stages of development from the time of proliferation until the establishment of synaptic connections. Developing glial cells also exhibit PCD. Cell death is the terminal phenotypic fate of subpopulations of developing neuronal and glial cells and, like other cell fate decisions, is controlled by both intrinsic and extrinsic signals.Why does PCD occur? This is a reasonable question to ask because the loss of large numbers of developing neurons is counterintuitive. Why should embryos invest precious resources in generating cells and tissues only to later cast many of these aside? A satisfactory answer to this apparent paradox requires an evolutionary perspective that addresses two central aspects of the problem. First, how did the biochemical machinery (the cell death program) needed to actively kill cells arise? Second, why, in many developing tissues, are more cells generated than are apparently needed? Because PCD acts to delete these excess cells, an understanding of the overproduction is critical if one is ever to understand cell death from an evolutionary perspective. The fi rst question was addressed in the previous section; however, understanding the evolution of the biochemical cell death program does not help answer the second question of why there is often a massive overproduction of neurons during development that are later eliminated by PCD. Two explanations have been offered The second view is that the overproduction of neurons (or other cells) is an inevitable outcome of the imprecise kinetics of proliferation of precursor cells. Once excess cells are available and the pro-and antiapoptotic machinery is in place, however, natural selection then acts via regulated cell survival and death to mediate a variety of different adaptive needs. For example, following the loss or absence of essential survival signals, the death of excess cells could be accomplished easily by coopting the cell death machinery that evolved to kill cells in early eukaryotes. In reality, both of the proposed mechanisms may occur. For example, it seems highly likely that the creation of transient structures that function at one stage of development but later regress and are discarded (e.g., the tail of tadpoles, larval muscles of insects, and transient neuronal structures such as sensory Rohon-Beard cells in frogs and fi sh) refl ects the direct selection of PCD as a means for mediating adaptive life history transitions (e.g., metamorphosis). In contrast, the presence of increased numbers of neurons in limb versus nonlimb spinal segments of vertebrates may result from the unselected outcome of an overproduction (proliferation) of neurons at all spinal levels, followed by increased survival in limb compared to nonlimb regions.Many of the circumstances in which the PCD of neurons occurs are thought to mediate distinct adaptive functions, as summarized in The biochemical and molecular pathways that regulate cell death and survival arose early in the evolution of animal life. Once this cellular capacity arose, however, it is likely that it was coopted to serve a variety of biological functions. In the nervous system, 2. Deletion of some of the progeny of a specifi c sublineage that are not needed (loss of specifi c progeny of the AB blastomere that is involved in generating ring ganglia in C. elegans).3. Negative selection of cells of an inappropriate phenotype (ligand/receptor-induced cell death in the early chick embryo retina?).4. Pattern formation and morphogenesis (neurulation/neural tube closure; differential thickness of cortical layers).5. Deletion of cells that act as transient targets or that provide transient guidance cues for axon projections (death of pioneer neurons/glia in insects).6. Removal of cells and tissues that serve a transient physiological or behavioral function (loss of Roh-Beard sensory neurons during metamorphosis in frogs).7. "Systems"-matching by creating optimal quantitative innervation between interconnected groups of neurons and between neurons and their targets (see text and 13. Regulated survival of subpopulations of adult-generated neurons as a means of experience-dependent plasticity (see text and *For references see The specifi c morphological appearance exhibited by degenerating neurons can provide insight into the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which the cells are destroyed. Historically, pathologists were the fi rst to be interested in this issue, and they focused on distinguishing different kinds of cell and tissue degeneration following disease, injury, and trauma Two different strategies can be used to quantify neuron death: One can determine the total number of neurons at different stages and quantify the decrease Until quite recently, cell degeneration in adult and developing tissues generally has been dichotomized into death by either apoptosis or necrosis, a distinction based initially on morphological differences and later on other apparent differences between the two Another feature that has been used to distinguish between apoptotic and necrotic cell death is the occurrence during apoptosis of a specifi c form of chromosomal DNA fragmentation and degradation that is mediated by DNA-specifi c proteases. DNA digestion occurs at internucleosomal sites, producing small, double-stranded fragments of DNA that migrate in a ladder pattern in multiples of 180-200 bp after electrophoresis in agarose gels. This form of DNA fragmentation can also be visualized in tissue sections by a technique that labels the double-stranded DNA breaks associated with apoptosis.It is widely believed that apoptosis and necrosis refl ect mechanistically distinct cell death pathways that are triggered by different stimuli. However, our basic understanding of these pathways is still limited, and caution should be exercised in drawing too fi ne of a distinction between them. For example, a variety of toxic and traumatic stimuli, previously thought to induce necrosis, can also induce morphological signs of apoptosis and may be associated with changes in PCD-or apoptosis-associated genes Historically, degenerating cells have been categorized into two classes: death by apoptosis or death by necrosis. Although the situation is more complex than is refl ected in this simple dichotomy, apoptosis in general is more characteristic of PCD, whereas necrosis is more characteristic of cells that die following injury or trauma. A variety of morphological, biochemical, and molecular features have been used to distinguish between these two types of cell death. However, the occurrence of certain features of apoptosis in neurons following injury and the occurrence of several types of PCD other than apoptosis indicates that a more accurate means of identifying and defi ning distinct forms of cell death should now be employed.As described previously, the normal death of cells in the developing nervous system has long been thought to be regulated by competition for NTFs (the Neurotrophic Hypothesis). Until quite recently, investigators agreed that the doomed neurons, lacking suffi cient amounts of a NTF to sustain normal metabolic events, passively degenerated by a process analogous to starvation. However, PCD of some nonneuronal cells was known previously to be a metabolically active, ATP-dependent process. For example, it had been shown that RNA or protein synthesis inhibitors prevent the programmed death of muscle cells in metamorphic insects and amphibians and also block the hormone-induced death of thymocytes in the mammalian immune system. Additionally, in the early 1980s, genetic mutations in the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans that prevent PCD had been described, thereby providing further evidence that neuronal death is a genetically regulated, metabolically active process. Beginning in the late 1980s, these various lines of evidence forced a reappraisal of the view that cell death in the nervous system is a passive process and led to the demonstration that for many types of neurons, PCD is regulated by the interaction of specifi c genetic programs that either inhibit or induce degeneration. Neurotrophic survival molecules are thought to act as extracellular signals that when present in suffi cient amounts result in intracellular signaling that either inhibits the expression or activity of pro-apoptotic genes or induces the expression or activity of anti-apoptotic gene products. Considerable progress has been made since the early 1990s in identifying cell death-associated genes and their pathways of action. Due to historical precedent, these have been classifi ed as pro-and anti-apoptotic genes. Although we retain this terminology, in some instances the genes involved may actually induce both apoptotic and nonapoptotic modes of degeneration (see the previous section).Although early genetic studies of cell death in C. elegans demonstrated that PCD is regulated by specifi c genes, the fi rst indication that the PCD of developing vertebrate neurons may also be controlled by similar so-called "killer" or "death" genes appeared in 1988 As summarized in Identifi cation of the DNA sequences of the major cell death genes ced-3, ced-4, and ced-9 in the worm in the 1980s and early 1990s resulted in the subsequent discovery of vertebrate and insect homologues that serve similar functions This increased genetic complexity in vertebrates in general and in neurons in particular probably refl ects a need for multiple levels of control of death and sur- The evolutionary conserved core cell death pathway in three diverse species. The role of structurally or functionally homologous genes in the three species are indicated by color coding. Transcription factors such as ces-1, ces-2, and tra-1 that specify cell fate in worms have not yet been identifi ed in developing fl y or vertebrate neurons. In the worm, these act upstream of Egl-1 but only on specifi c, not all, cells that die. Ces-1 directly represses ces-2 and thereby blocks ces-1 from preventing Egl-1 activation. Tra-1 can also prevent Egl-1 activation. Egl-1 is pro-apoptotic by its role in preventing ced-9 from preventing ced-4 from inducing the killing activity of ced-3. In the mouse, once neurons are selected to undergo PCD (e.g., by failure to obtain NTF support), the pro-apoptotic gene Bax interacts with and inhibits the anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-2 in mitochondria. This results in the release from mitochondria of cytochrome-c, which forms a complex with Apaf-1 and caspase-9 that in turn activates downstream caspases such as caspase-3 that ultimately directly or indirectly degrade both the nucleus and diverse cytoplasmic targets. These degradative changes are what defi ne apoptosis and that result in eventual engulfment and phagocytosis of the apoptotic cell. In some situations two additional molecules released from mitochondria (along with cytochrome-c) are the pro-apoptotic proteins AIF, that can degrade the nucleus independent of caspases, and Smac, which can inhibit IAP and promote the apoptotic pathway via caspase-9 and caspase-3. Although not shown here, in some situations developing neurons undergoing PCD activate cell cycle proteins that also serve a signaling function required for apoptosis A central integrator of cell death in vertebrates is the mitochondrion PCD is a metabolically active process that involves specifi c genetic pathways necessary for the cascade of events leading to degeneration. Several genes in the PCD pathway were fi rst identifi ed in C. elegans and homologues have been found in insects and vertebrates. The mitochondrion is a central integrator of cell death signaling. Although most developing neurons appear to share a common core PCD pathway, morphological and biochemical evidence also indicates the presence of alternatives to the core PCD machinery. One goal of the increased evolutionary complexity in the regulation of neuronal PCD is the need for additional checks and balances before a cell passes the irreversible point of commitment to die. Because virtually all neurons are postmitotic and neuron numbers fi nite, multiple, relatively fail-safe, mechanisms are required so that accidental death occurs only as a last resort.Following the discovery of NGF by Levi-Montalcini, Cohen and Hamburger in the 1950s and 1960s, and its possible role in the survival of developing sympathetic neurons Sympathetic and sensory ganglia removed from developing animals have been shown to produce a dense halo of axonal outgrowth when treated with NGF ( One prediction of the neurotrophic hypothesis is that access to NGF in only the distant target region is adequate to support the survival of the remote cell body. This idea has been tested by Robert Campenot and colleagues in vitro. NGF has been applied selectively only to local axon terminals in a three-compartment tissue culture chamber to determine the long-and short-range effects of NGF treatment. NGF-dependent neuronal cell bodies in the central chamber survived when only their terminals were treated with the factor, indicating that target-derived NGF available only to neurites can generate and retrogradely transport the signaling required for cell body survival. Peripheral processes were lost rapidly and selectively in outer chambers where NGF was withdrawn, but were maintained and grew in the outer chambers where NGF was FIGURE 19.10 Phenotypic alterations in sensory/motor pathways caused by null mutations in NGF/trkA and NT-3/trkC. In the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) of normal mice (A), small-diameter (red), medium-diameter (green), and large-diameter (blue) neurons are present. Largediameter neurons innervate muscle spindles and other proprioceptive end organs and have axon terminations in the lowest laminae of the dorsal horn and in the ventral horn. These neurons are lost when NT-3 or trkC is absent (compare A and B). Many of the small-diameter neurons innervate skin, respond to temperature and pain, and have terminations in the dorsal-most laminae of the dorsal horn. These neurons are lost when NGF or trkA is absent (compare A and C). DRG neurons indicated in green are neurotrophin-independent mechanoreceptive neurons (peripheral projections not shown). Modifi ed and redrawn from The modern study of neuronal cell death began with investigations of how synaptic targets of sensory and motor neurons regulate their development. Viktor Hamburger and Rita Levi-Montalcini, beginning in the 1930s, ultimately showed that targets promote the survival and maintenance of innervating neurons. This notion, in turn, provided a conceptual framework for the discovery of the fi rst target-derived NTF, nerve growth factor. From these beginnings, the neurotrophic hypothesis was formulated: neurons compete for limiting amounts of target-derived survival promoting (trophic) agents during development. NGF was established as the prototypical target-derived NTF.Only a few subpopulations of peripheral neurons, including sympathetic and some sensory neurons, are exclusively dependent on NGF for survival during development. While cholinergic neurons in the mammalian basal forebrain and noradrenergic neurons in the avian locus coeruleus are NGF responsive, the survival of CNS neurons is largely unchanged following the null mutation of NGF. Other survival factors are now known to regulate neuron survival elsewhere in the nervous system. Extracts made from a number of tissues, as well as media containing proteins secreted by a variety of cultured neuronal and nonneuronal cells, all have been shown to support the survival of many different classes of neurons that are not NGF dependent and that do not express the NGF receptor trkA, suggesting that additional NTFs exist. Because NTFs are made in extremely low quantities, the biochemical isolation of NGF-related molecules using conventional protein purifi cation methods proved to be diffi cult.A signifi cant breakthrough occurred with the purifi cation of a second NGF-related NTF by Yves Barde and colleagues in 1982. Unlike NGF, which was purifi ed several hundredfold from an extraordinarily rich FIGURE 19.11 Models of NGF, the catalytic (full-length) TrkA receptor, and p75NTR and its binding partners (sortilin, Nogo receptor and Lingo 1). Note the ability of one ligand (NGF) to bring together two trk receptor molecules to initiate signaling. P75NTR lacks a cytosolic kinase domain, but associates with partners (including trk receptors, interaction not shown) to assemble signaling platforms. Note that the NGF dimer binds to a p75NTR monomer in an opposite orientation compared to TrkA. C1, C2, cysteine clusters 1, 2; Ig1, Ig2, IgG-like domains 1, 2; LRR, leucine-rich repeat; CRD 1-4, cysteine-rich domains 1-4. Modifi ed from Each neurotrophin family member is synthesized as an approximately 250 amino acid precursor (proneurotrophin) that is processed into a roughly 120 amino acid protomer. Homologous regions of the several different family members are concentrated in six hydrophobic domains containing cysteine residues. The linkage formed by each homodimer ligand utilizes these regions to form a "cysteine knot" that maintains the twin protomers in juxtaposition. The secreted dimer appears as a symmetrical twin with variable regions containing basic amino acid residues exposed on the surface The purifi cation, molecular cloning, and expression of BDNF opened a fl oodgate of research on an NGFrelated family of NTFs called neurotrophins or nerve feeding factors. Each neurotrophin family member is released as a homodimer with a conserved region containing a cysteine knot in the core of the molecule. The secreted factor is a symmetrical twin with duplicate sites used for bivalent receptor binding and formation of signaling platforms.NGF binds to a relatively small number of very high-affi nity-binding sites and a second set of about 10-fold more abundant, but lower affi nity, binding sites at higher concentrations A major breakthrough in the characterization of the NGF receptors came with the fortuitous discovery and cloning of an oncogene identifi ed in a human colon cancer. The sequence of this 140-kDa transmembrane protein contained a cytoplasmic kinase common to many growth factor receptors. The corresponding proto-oncogene was named trk (pronounced "track"-for tropomyosin-related kinase). It rapidly was appreciated as a member of the tyrosine kinase-containing receptor superfamily  with trk mRNA expression localized to NGF responsive neurons. Low-stringency screening of cDNA libraries with the original trk proto-oncogene probes led to the discovery of other related neurotrophin receptors. The NGF binding receptor was called trkA, whereas two additional 145-kDa members of this protein family were named trkB and trkC The trkB receptor is activated specifi cally by low concentrations of BDNF or NT-4/5 and, to a lesser extent, by higher concentrations of NT-3. NT-3 activates the trkC receptor most effectively. All trk receptors contain three leucine-rich motifs, two cysteine clusters, and two immunoglobulin-like motifs in the extracellular region, a transmembrane domain and a tyrosine kinase domain in the cytosolic region Although trk receptors account for many of the biological responses of neurons to neurotrophins, p75NTR can modify trk ligand binding and neurotrophin specifi city, associates with additional signaling partners, and can initiate pathways for intracellular signaling independent of trk receptors Many neurons have both specifi c and common binding sites for neurotrophins. Biological responses primarily are associated with high-affi nity binding and rapid phosphorylation signaling events. All neurotrophins bind p75NTR, the common neurotrophin receptor. p75NTR lacks a cytoplasmic kinase domain but can independently initiate signaling, can associate with additional signaling partners, and enhances signaling through trkA. There are three tyrosine receptor kinase (trk) family members: trkA, trkB, and trkC. Each receptor binds one or more members of the neurotrophin family. Splice variants of trks result in isoforms that include truncated receptors with reduced signaling capabilities. p75NTR is related to the TNFR family of death receptors and contains a cytosolic "death domain." Activation of p75NTR, especially by pro-neurotrophins, may serve to kill neurons or other cell types through well-established signaling pathways used to promote PCD.Neurotrophins are expressed as larger precursors that are cleaved by furins and prohormone convertases. The extent of cleavage differs between cell types. The precursor forms were believed for a long time to be of little functional signifi cance, and it was thought that the mature neurotrophins were the only important moiety that was secreted. Research by Barbara Hempstead and her colleagues in the early 2000s demonstrated that many cells secrete pro-neurotrophins, and that the release of both pro-neurotrophins and mature neurotrophins contributes to the spectrum of physiological functions. Pro-neurotrophins bind with higher affi nity to p75NTR than mature neurotrophins and appear to be the "preferred" ligand for p75NTR. Whether endogenous pro-neurotrophins bind with lower affi nity to trk receptors is still controversial. To activate different signaling pathways, the neurotrophin-bound p75NTR can associate with several signaling partners, including Nogo receptor (a GPI-linked protein), sortilin (a member of the VPS10 family), and LINGO-1 (involved in myelin-based growth inhibition, The classic neurotrophic hypothesis postulates that NTFs, including neurotrophins, are released by postsynaptic target cells and bind to presynaptic receptors for internalization, retrograde axonal transport and activation of signal transduction cascades after arrival at the neuronal soma ( The regulation of secretion of neurotrophins is particularly important for mechanisms of synaptic plasticity Interestingly, a naturally occurring polymorphism of the BDNF gene (a Val-Met substitution in the 5'proregion of BDNF) gives rise to a reduced capacity for activity-dependent (but not constitutive) secretion of BDNF, causing abnormal hippocampal function and some learning and memory defi cits in humans Endogenous neurotrophins may be derived from either pre-or postsynaptic sites and they may act on either side of the synaptic cleft in paracrine or autocrine modes to implement functional and structural changes in synaptic plasticity The neurotrophic hypothesis postulates retrograde axonal movement of trophic signals. Evidence for retrograde transport of exogenous neurotrophins (NGF) was established in the 1970s However, not all trophic signals from the nerve terminal that arrive at the soma may require the neurotrophin to be physically transported in a ligand-receptor complex. In addition to retrograde axonal transport from nerve terminals to the soma, trophic signals also are transported anterogradely along axons (possibly even a quantitatively more important route) from soma to nerve terminals, mediated by kinesin motors, followed by activity-dependent release of neurotrophins from axon terminals. Indeed, some data suggest that BDNF and NT-3 may rapidly activate tetrodotoxin-insensitive sodium channels, which would blur the distinction between neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, and NTFs.Expression and secretion of pro-neurotrophins has signifi cant physiological functions in the regulation of cell death. Pro-neurotrophins bind preferentially to the p75NTR. The p75NTR associates with several different signaling partners to form multiple signaling platforms that include sortilin and Nogo receptors. Secretion of neurotrophins requires activity-dependent stimulation patterns that may specifi cally strengthen active synapses. Neurotrophins are transported retrogradely along axons in signaling endosomes, but they can also be transported anterogradely for release from axon terminals. Trk receptors are expressed both preand postsynaptically, forming paracrine as well as autocrine loops of synaptic signaling. Synaptically released BDNF may have rapid effects on sodium channels, acting in a fashion similar to classical peptide neurotransmitters.Neurotrophin binding to trk receptors at the cell surface causes the formation of receptor dimers and coactivation of their tyrosine kinase activity. The homodimeric structure of the factors allows each bivalent ligand to bring two separate receptor molecules into close proximity. Aggregated receptors phosphorylate each other on specifi c tyrosine substrates within intracellular domains. The generation of phosphotyrosine residues in turn activates the receptor kinase and further catalyzes the formation of large signaling complexes through the recruitment of adaptor proteins. These proteins link the activated receptor kinase with intracellular signaling pathways shared by other growth factors Receptor signal transduction involves multiple signaling pathways that can differ between individual neurons or in the same neurons at different periods of time (depending on recent events). Thus, the response of neurons to trophic factor stimuli is dependent on the  III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT intracellular status of the cell in a dynamic fashion. The molecular components of these pathways are so well conserved that many of the signaling proteins are interchangeable among invertebrate and vertebrate species. Three of these pathways have been identifi ed to implement trk signal transduction events that mediate survival as well as many other cellular responses to neurotrophins One of the best known Ras-dependent signaling pathways involves the ERK family of MAP kinases. This cascade is composed of serine/threonine kinases that are serially phosphorylated and activated. The initial member of this cascade is Raf, which phosphorylates and activates MEK, which phosphorylates the MAP kinases (ERK1 and ERK2). Once activated, these MAP kinases in turn phosphorylate a number of cytoplasmic and nuclear effectors. Importantly, activation of MAP kinases and their substrate, the protein kinase RSK, results in the phosphorylation of a number of transcription factors, including CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein), which controls expression of immediate-early genes (i.e., c-fos and c-jun) and delayed response genes. Once activated, transcription factors cause rapid and long-lasting changes in gene expression regulating cell survival, axonal and dendritic growth, neuronal differentiation, synaptic potentiation, and plasticity. The ultimate biological response differs with the duration of Ras activity in response to receptor phosphorylation. TrkA activation of Ras persists much longer compared to only a rapid and transient Ras activation following receptor transduction by epidermal growth factor, suggesting that the duration of Ras activation is a critical determinant of transcriptional activity and biological responses ). In addition, the requirement on Ras-dependent pathways for biological responses varies among neuron types.Neurotrophic factor receptor activation of the PI-3 kinase pathway is essential for the normal survival of many neurons. The phosphatidyl inositides made by PI-3 kinase regulate in part the activity of AKT (protein kinase B). This important protein kinase plays a critical role in controlling the biological activity of several regulatory proteins that govern normal PCD (see Three tyrosine receptor kinases and trk family members-trkA, trkB, and trkC-transduce neurotrophin signals. Signaling pathways used by the trk family members are shared with those activated by many other growth factor receptors. Neurotrophin binding to trk causes receptor dimerization and phosphorylation of cytoplasmic tyrosine residues. Phosphotyrosines recruit cytosolic adaptor proteins that couple the activated receptor with intracellular signaling pathways. The biological response of the cell to a neurotrophic factor is dependent on the dynamic status of the pathway that can vary with recent cell history. Three of the best investigated signaling pathways are PLC-g, Ras-ERK kinase, and PI-3K. Normal PCD is governed in many neurons by PI-3 kinase activation of the protein kinase Akt. Trophic factor deprivation can lead to the release of pro-apoptotic mechanisms that promote cell death.We have emphasized neurotrophins as an example of the activities of NTFs in the developing and mature nervous system. Yet there are several other important families of NTFs. Often NTF families utilize receptors with coreceptor complexes (e.g., neurotrophins-trk, p75NTR; and GDNF family ligands-ret and GFRs). In many tissues, intercellular induction factors are important for governing the proliferation and differentiation of both embryonic and adult stem cells. In addition, these factors also play an important role in the response of tissues to trauma, infl ammation, infection, or tumor growth. In 1974, Stanley Cohen proposed that both lymphocyte-derived and nonlymphocyte-derived chemotactic and migration inhibitory factors be grouped into families of cytokines ("cell movement factors"). More recently, this term has been adopted as a general umbrella for many families of secreted proteins that mediate diverse biological responses, including changes in the immune system (interleukins), tumor cytotoxicity (tumor necrosis factors), and inhibition of viral replication or cell growth (interferons) Many cytokines originally were named according to the particular biological activity that was utilized for their isolation, only to be later rediscovered or renamed as important mediators of other physiological processes. For example, some factors were isolated on the basis of their ability to enhance the survival of specifi c populations of neurons isolated in vitro. These include ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF); glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF); and the other GDNF family members, neurturin, persephin, and artemin. CNTF is a member of a broader family of neuropoietic cytokines, including leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), oncostatin M, cardiotrophinlike cytokine/cytokine-like factor (CLC/CLF) and cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1), that share a common threedimensional structure and receptor subunits. CNTF originally was isolated and named because it supports the survival of neurons cultured from the parasympathetic ciliary ganglion. The GDNF family primarily supports enteric neurons, dopaminergic neurons, and some motoneurons LIF, which has a number of actions in the immune system and other nonneuronal tissues, shares receptor subunits with the CNTF family and therefore can mimic both the survival and the cholinergic differentiation activities of CNTF observed in culture. Many cytokines important for the development or maintenance of other organs and tissues are also widely expressed within the nervous system. Their roles in the nervous system, however, remain to be defi ned. Likewise, factors fi rst recognized as neuronal survival factors have mitogenic properties for either nonneuronal cells or neuronal precursors. As a result, these pleiotropic factors are grouped into families based on their protein sequences and receptor usage rather than on their biological properties. Neurotrophic factors that prevent neuronal death during development appear to have many other important biological activities, including effects on cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, axonal growth and sprouting, alterations in dendritic arbors, and synaptic plasticity of the nervous system As described earlier, neurotrophins have been shown repeatedly to play fundamental roles in the survival of many peripheral neuronal populations. Null mutations of neurotrophins or their cognate trk receptors manifest substantial defi cits in dependent populations support to CNS neurons is likely to arise from multiple families of NTFs with possible synergistic and/or compensatory effects. The traditional view of the neurotrophic hypothesis has been that trophic support is derived from target tissues, but other sources of trophic support are now recognized Finally, although beyond the scope of the present chapter, neurotrophins and other NTFs and their receptors also are distributed throughout the mature brain, and NTFs can alter neural activity by rapid and long-term changes in synaptic transmission. Neurotrophins and other NTFs also play a role in modulating long-term changes in functional and anatomical plasticity in the developing and mature brain by altering long-term potentiation, synaptic connectivity, and responses to stress, infl ammation, and trauma There are multiple families of NTFs. CNTF and LIF belong to a neuropoietic cytokine family. The expression and biological properties of these cytokines distinguish them from neurotrophins. They possess widespread neurotrophic activity for many different neuronal and nonneuronal populations in vitro and facilitate the cholinergic differentiation of sympathetic and motor neurons. The GDNF family (GDNF, neurturin, artemin, and persephin) is related to the TGF-b gene family and has effects on enteric, dopaminergic   The PCD of vertebrate neurons and their precursors can occur at any stage of neuronal development from neurogenesis and neurulation to the time of establishment of synaptic connections with targets and afferents, and can involve mitotically active cells and migrating neurons, as well as undifferentiated and immature postmitotic cells Studies of the regulation of vertebrate neuronal PCD have shown that targets are critically involved in regulating how many postmitotic cells in the innervating population survive or die. Complete or partial deletion of targets reduces survival, whereas increasing the size or number of available targets results in increased survival In the case of avian spinal motoneurons that innervate limb skeletal muscle, the number of neurons that survive the period of PCD bears a 1 : 1 relationship with the number of primary myotubes present in individual muscle precursors during the period of cell death, rather than being correlated with the fi nal number of myotubes or myofi bers (i.e., muscle size) present after the cessation of cell death. Accordingly, in this situation, motoneuron numbers are controlled, in part, by signals that are limited by the number of primary myotubes available. Although for many populations of neurons the essential factors provided by targets that mediate neuronal survival are not known, extrapolation from what is known for sensory, sympathetic, and motor neurons suggests that specifi c target-derived NTFs are involved. Target-dependent motoneuron survival is mediated by muscle-derived proteins. Several candidate motoneuron NTFs have been identifi ed and include BDNF, NT-4/5, IGF, HGF, and CNTF and GDNF family members. The PCD of CNS neurons in the avian isthmo-optic nucleus (ION) and neurons in the mammalian thalamus and substantia nigra are controlled by many of the same mechanisms involved in the PCD of peripheral neurons, including a need for target-derived NTFs such as BDNF. As discussed previously, the survival of myelinforming glial cells also involves competition, in this case, competition for trophic signals derived from axons. In both neurons and glia, the fi nal outcome of this competitive process Motoneurons (and some other neuronal populations as well, including retinal ganglion cells, isthmooptic neurons (ION) cells, and ciliary ganglion neurons) have another interesting property in that their target dependency appears to be regulated by physiological synaptic interactions with their targets Because PCD is enhanced after the pharmacological blockade of afferent synaptic activity, the functional input provided by afferents also appears to be of fundamental importance in this situation Although the cellular mechanisms are not yet well established, the survival and death of newly generated neurons in the adult hippocampus and olfactory system provide another example of how afferent activity can regulate these events. For example, learning, stress, motor activity, sensory stimuli, and other environmental infl uences appear to control granule cell numbers in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus by activity-dependent modulation of neuronal survival During development, the fate of a cell, including the decision to live or die, can be determined by intrinsic cell-autonomous mechanisms or by extrinsic signals derived from cell-cell interactions. The survival of most developing neurons is likely to be dependent on a variety of signals, including multiple NTFs derived from diverse sources, that serve to maintain survival and regulate differentiation in complex ways that refl ect the specifi c requirements of neurons at each step in their development. Although developing neurons can undergo PCD at any stage of differentiation, the best studied type of PCD occurs as neurons are establishing connections with targets and afferents. Targets and afferents provide critical survivalpromoting signals that prevent PCD. One major class of such signals are NTFs. Neurons are thought to compete for limiting amounts of these NTFs. For many populations of neurons, synaptic transmission and physiological activity also plays an important role in regulating survival. Accordingly, both NTFs and electrical activity/synaptic transmission are important for the regulation of PCD and are closely linked functionally.The widespread occurrence of PCD during normal development indicates that cell loss, together with cell production (proliferation), is a fundamental mechanism for controlling fi nal cell numbers in many tissues. Accordingly, the dysregulation of normal PCD could be maladaptive and pathological. For example, devel- opmental, genetic, or congenital neurological defects may be caused by perturbations of PCD. However, there is relatively little solid evidence on this point. Although there are genetic mutations in animals and humans that involve signifi cant alterations in neuron numbers, whether these always refl ect the loss of control of normal PCD or refl ect other abnormalities (e.g., altered neurogenesis) that could also infl uence fi nal cell numbers often is not known. Nonetheless, the idea that aberrant cell death in the developing and adult nervous system may refl ect a loss of normal control mechanisms for survival is appealing in that the increased understanding of the genetic regulation of PCD provides a potentially powerful and rational approach for the development of therapeutic treatment strategies.A hopeful sign in this regard comes from reports that neuronal (or glial) death in patients with Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's and Motor Neuron Disease, Down syndrome, multiple sclerosis, retinal degeneration, epilepsy, and in some forms of traumatic CNS injury (e.g., head trauma, ischemia, cerebral stroke, spinal cord injury, perinatal asphyxia) exhibit some characteristics of apoptosis, such as the stereotyped fragmentation of DNA and the expression of genes or gene products associated previously with developmental PCD (e.g., the bcl-2 gene family) Despite this promising perspective for utilizing the increased understanding of the biology of PCD for developing therapeutic strategies to treat pathological neuron death, it is important to consider the validity of the widely held assumption that it is the death of neurons that is the primary cause of the pathophysiology in these diseases. In fact, there is growing evidence that neuronal and synaptic dysfunction that precedes any signifi cant neuronal loss may be a major factor in the behavioral pathology that characterizes many neurodegenerative diseases Because PCD is primarily a developmental phenomenon, historically the major focus of investigation has been the normal biology of cell death in the embryo, fetus, and newborn. However, with the growing recognition that pathological neuronal cell death may share certain biochemical and molecular features with PCD, there is growing hope that a better understanding of PCD may reveal potential therapeutic strategies for the treatment of developmental neuropathologies, neurodegenerative disease, and neuronal loss following CNS trauma.In the development of both central and peripheral nervous systems, synapse formation generates some connections that exist only transiently. Proof that synapses are eliminated comes from the fi nding that in many parts of the mammalian nervous system, presynaptic axons are transiently connected to postsynaptic partners during development. One unambiguous example is the loss of synapses between motoraxons and muscle fi bers. At birth, each neuromuscular junction receives convergent innervation from multiple motor axons In all these cases, synapse elimination reduces the number of axons that innervate target cells, making the term input elimination perhaps a better way of describing the phenomenon. In most of the developing CNS, however, it remains unknown whether synapse elimination is occurring. The diffi culty is that total number of synapses may not be decreasing at the stage when axonal inputs are being eliminated. Thus assaying for synapse elimination requires quantifying a change in the number of innervating axons, which in turn requires a means of counting them, or at least having a situation where distinct but overlapping pathways can be separately labeled or stimulated (such as the two eyes). It is therefore possible that there is far more synapse elimination during development than presently documented. For example, stimulation of the optic nerve with progressively larger voltages to count the number of retinal ganglion cells innervating individual lateral geniculate neurons has revealed a dramatic change from more than 20 innervating axons to only 1 or 2 during the fi rst postnatal month Importantly, synapse elimination does not lead to a net weakening of synaptic drive on target cells. In the example just mentioned, the retinogeniculate axons that persist undergo a greater than 50-fold increase in the effi cacy, which more than compensates for the loss of other axonal inputs to the same target cells. Analogous increases in synaptic effi cacy of inputs that persist have been described for the excitatory drive to neurons of the magnocellularis nucleus It is also clear that in many situations the alterations occurring during this developmental reorganization are better described as a redistribution of synapses than as loss per se. The view is based on the fact that counts of the total number of neurons that innervate the target is not changing during the stage when the number of axons innervating each postsynaptic cell is decreasing (see for example, muscle, axonal branch trimming during development has been long appreciated by an electrophysiological assay: the proportion of the total twitch tension an individual axon exerts decreases gradually over early postnatal life In the developing nervous system both the number of axons that converge on postsynaptic cells, and the ∼5 to ∼1 preganglionic axons Postnatal rat ∼14 to ∼7 preganglionic axons Postnatal hamster Although at fi rst sight it might seem reasonable that synapse elimination is some form of error correction to rid the developing nervous system of connectivity mistakes, this does not seem to be the case. In muscle for example, the lost connections are from exactly the motor neurons as those connections that are maintained because each neuron in the pool is losing some connections. In some situations the outcome of synapse elimination may sharpen specifi city based on topographic maps (see for example, An alternative hypothesis is that the loss of connections is a consequence of the extreme degree to which mammalian (and other vertebrate) nervous systems are composed of duplicated neurons number of postsynaptic cells an axon contacts decreases. The removal of inputs is due to a process of branch trimming. Concurrently, the remaining inputs appear to compensate by adding synaptic strength at least in part by the formation of new synapses. This redistribution refi nes synaptic circuitry by allowing an axon to strongly focus its innervation on a subset of the cells it initially contacted while each postsynaptic cell is III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT Axosome SC Axon FIGURE 20.4 Time-lapse imaging shows how axonal branches are lost during synapse elimination at the neuromuscular junction. Two neuromuscular junctions (NMJ1 and NMJ2) were viewed in vivo on postnatal days 7, 8, and 9 in a transgenic mouse that expresses YFP in its motor axons (green). The acetylcholine receptors at the muscle fi ber membrane are labeled with rhodamine tagged a-bungarotoxin (red). On day 7, NMJ1 is multiply innervated whereas NMJ2 is singly innervated by a branch of one of the axons that innervates NMJ1. One day later (postnatal day 8), one of the motor axons innervating NMJ1 becomes thinner all the way back to its branch point. When viewed on postnatal day 9, this thin branch is no longer connected to NMJ1 and now ends in a bulb-shaped swelling that is called a retraction bulb. Modifi ed from skeletal muscles containing thousands of muscle fi bers. This differs from invertebrates that have single identifi ed motor neurons innervating single muscle fi bers There are two potential consequences of such redundancy in pre-and postsynaptic populations. First, many presynaptic neurons could be appropriate matches for each postsynaptic cell causing substantial axonal convergence or fan-in. Second, many postsynaptic neurons are appropriate matches for each presynaptic axon causing substantial axonal divergence or fan-out. For example, in mammalian muscles, because the many nearly identical motor neurons projecting to one muscle may all be equally appropriate presynaptic partners for each muscle fi ber, it is not unexpected that multiple axons can converge on the same target cell axon to become completely nonoverlapping, and thus completely distinct from other axons' projections ( By parsing highly redundant circuitry into multiple, unique, functionally distinct circuits, synapse elimination may be an essential maturation step for synaptic circuits that begin with considerable redundancy, such as our own nervous systems and those of other terrestrial vertebrates. It is possible that this paring down strategy is less relevant in other kinds of animals.Indeed a comparison between animals, such as insects, that show little evidence of neuronal redundancy and little evidence of input elimination with animals, such as mammals, with large redundant pools of neurons and extensive elimination during development suggests very different neurodevelopmental strategies. Humans and other mammals seem highly dependent on experience for the acquisition of their behavioral repertoire, whereas invertebrate behavior is, to a greater degree, intrinsic. Compare, for example, the ease with which a newly hatched dragonfl y takes wing versus the protracted period necessary for a human child to learn to walk. It is possible that the neuronal redundancy found in higher vertebrates that give rise to overlapping convergent and divergent pathways are used in the acquisition of skills by the experience-mediated selection of connections.This difference between mammals and invertebrates does not mean that synapses cannot be eliminated in invertebrates. Indeed, many studies have made the point that synaptic remodeling through addition and removal occurs in insect nervous systems (see for example, In contrast to invertebrates, the nervous systems of terrestrial vertebrates contain reduplicated populations of neurons that serve each function. Elimination of synaptic connections during development may be an adaptation that converts highly overlapping connections of redundant neurons into unique circuits. Because this conversion may be based on experiences that affect the development of the nervous system this process may tune the nervous systems of higher animals to the particular environment of each individual animal.Thanks in large part to the power of fl uorescence microscopy and the accessibility of the neuromuscular junction; it has been possible to describe the physical changes in axons and synapses that take place during synapse elimination. Interestingly this purely descriptive analysis has yielded important clues and some mechanistic insights into the process of synapse elimination. As Yogi Berra said, "You can observe a lot by just watching." Imaging neuromuscular junctions at various ages in early postnatal life makes clear the fact that the process of synapse elimination is not a sudden calamitous event but rather protracted process. At birth, multiple axons converging at a neuromuscular junction are highly intermingled and the extent of the receptor areas occupied by each is similar These time-lapse studies also demonstrated that the shift in favor of one axon was not irreversible. In some junctions for example, it was hard to predict which axon might ultimately be maintained because the input with the majority of the territory shifted back and forth. Such fl ips in which axon seemed to be dominant suggest that the outcome is not preordained. Instead, axons at multiply innervated neuromuscular junctions appear may be in the midst of a highly dynamic interaction to determine which axon is most likely to stay.Insights into the regulation of this dynamism come from analyses of each of the branches of individual motor axons. In lines of transgenic mice in which fl uorescent proteins are expressed in a very small subset of motor neurons, it has been possible to examine all the branches of one axon during the developmental period when branches are being pruned. These studies show that axonal branch loss is occurring asynchronously among all the branches of one axon To explore this possibility, transgenic mice with only two labeled axons (one yellow and one cyan) were generated to examine each of the neuromuscular junctions cooccupied by the same two axons within a developing muscle. The result was dramatic: at each of the shared neuromuscular junctions, the two axons seemed to be in the same relative state Neuromuscular junctions in transgenic mice that express YFP (yellow) and CFP (blue) were imaged multiple times during early postnatal life. (A-E) views of one neuromuscular junction between P8 and P15. The CFP axon takes over occupancy of the postsynaptic sites (labeled red) in the upper parts of the junction that were formerly innervated by the YFP axon. The YFP labeled axon withdrew until only a retraction bulb remained (E, asterisk). At P12, a process of the CFP axon had begun to invade the territory of the YFP axon (D, circle and arrow in inset). (F-J) Although the CFP axon (blue and insets) has greater terminal area (∼70%) at the fi rst view, it progressively withdraws from the junction (arrows). Its retraction bulb can be seen in (I) and (J) (asterisks). Scale bars = 10 mm. Insets show the blue axons. From different. This result argued that the fate of axonal branches and the rate at which they are eliminated is related strictly to the identity of the coinnervating axons. But why might the yellow axon be consistently "better" than the blue at all the coinnervated neuromuscular junctions they share? Counts of the total number of neuromuscular junctions each axon innervated (i.e., its motor unit size) provided a hint; the outcome of synapse elimination seemed to depend on the relative sizes of the two axons' motor units. In particular, neurons with larger motor units (such as the cyan axon in These results raise the obvious question of what resources might be in limited supply in an axon that could affect synapse maintenance. One popular idea is that the synaptic activity of an axon terminal is a key determinant in its ultimate fate. Is it possible that large motor units have fewer synaptic resources (e.g., synaptic vesicles per synapse) than small motor units? This idea was tested by generating mice in which a subset of axons had diminished choline acetyltransferase (ChAT, the enzyme that synthesizes the acetylcholine; Structural studies of synapse elimination at the neuromuscular junction have provided a number of clues as to how and why branches are pruned. One important insight is that synapse elimination at individual neuromuscular junctions may be part of a larger scale circuit optimization. This optimization may be occurring to assure that all the connections that are maintained into adulthood are suffi ciently strong that they can consistently drive the postsynaptic cell to threshold. Perhaps such an optimization requires axons to forfeit some of their synaptic connections to assure that the ones that remain have suffi cient resources to be consistently effi cacious.A number of lines of evidence suggest that the loss of synapses is the consequence of competition. The word "competition," however, has many different meanings, and which of these defi nitions is most relevant to synaptic development is an area of some debate Importantly, which particular axon is maintained does not seem to be preordained. There is no evidence of an extensive molecular specifi city that uniquely matches each motor axon to an exclusive subset of muscle fi bers or each climbing fi ber to a matching set of Purkinje cells. But if it is a competition, how is this competition being driven? Competitive mechanisms range from situations where the contestants interact with each other directly (e.g., a sumo wrestling match) to mechanisms where the contestants have little or anything to do with each other and a third party (a judge) decides the outcome (e.g., competition for a Pulitzer prize). Evidence in the neuromuscular system suggests that synaptic competition may be more akin to the latter alternative with the muscle fi ber playing the role of judge.In 1970, Paul Redfern published the fi rst physiological report of synapse elimination. He found that rat diaphragm muscle fi bers were innervated by several motor neurons in the fi rst postnatal week but this multiple innervation was short lived; by two weeks of age all muscle fi bers were singly innervated ( Other experiments have questioned whether activity is even necessary for synapse elimination. For example, after reinnervation of adult muscle, evidence has been obtained showing that electrically silent inputs can displace other electrically silent inputs As these confl icting experimental results demonstrate, the role of activity in synapse elimination is not easily summarized. One way to obtain a clearer idea of the role of activity is to view "activity" not as one phenomenon but as several different infl uences. For example,• Synaptic competition may be affected by the relative effi cacy (i.e., amplitude of the postsynaptic potential) of different axons attempting to drive the postsynaptic cell to threshold, with the most powerful input being favored. • Alternatively, the fi ring frequency of an axon (i.e., action potentials per second) may have a negative impact especially if the axon has a large arbor and thus insuffi cient resources to maintain effi cacious synaptic transmission throughout its terminal branches.• Finally, activity may affect the electrical properties of the postsynaptic cell or cell region either encouraging synapse elimination (excitable encouraging membrane) or preventing it (inexcitable postsynaptic membrane) ( The most accepted hypothesis is that activity differences between axons is critical for synapse elimination to occur. Indeed, because an axon has many synaptic release sites impinging on one postsynaptic cell that do not seem to compete with themselves, interaxonal activity differences are assumed to be a crucial element of the competition. An experiment in which one part of a neuromuscular junction was desynchronized from the rest by silencing its acetylcholine receptors with alpha bungarotoxin (Box 20.1) examined how activity differences might give rise to synapse elimination. Focal postsynaptic silencing at one site within an otherwise normally active adult neuromuscular junction induced synapse withdrawal from the silenced site ( III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FIGURE 20.12 An experimental test of the role of postsynaptic activity in synapse elimination. If axons converging on the same postsynaptic cell were competing based on their effi cacy in activating the postsynaptic cell, then locally blocking synaptic transmission at one axon's synaptic site should lead to its elimination and the maintenance of the other unblocked inputs. In this test, focal blockade of neuromuscular transmission was accomplished by applying saturating doses of a-bungarotoxin with a fi ne glass pipette (upper panels, red) to a neuromuscular junction in a living mouse. The AChR sites (middle panels) and the nerve terminals (lower panels) were viewed at the time of blockade and several times over the next few weeks. Following focal blockade (left panels) progressive loss of the nerve terminal staining and AChRs (arrows) was observed in regions previously saturated with a-bungarotoxin. However, when the entire neuromuscular junction was blocked (right panels) there was no loss. These results argue that active postsynaptic synaptic sites can cause the disassembly of inactive sites. Adapted from Although Hebb argued that inputs that are consistently active when the postsynaptic cell is active, are strengthened, this idea is the logical obverse: synapses that consistently fail to excite the postsynaptic cell when the cell is being activated are eliminated (Lichtman and Balice- This view of the role of activity implies that if all axons were fi ring synchronously then synapse elimination would not occur, which is exactly the conclusion reached using a regeneration model for synapse elimination Such an activity-based mechanism for synapse elimination would tend to pit the synchronously active synaptic terminals of one axon on a given postsynaptic cell (a synaptic "cartel") against the terminals of other axons contacting the same target cell. In this way an axon's terminals on one postsynaptic cell cannot compete against themselves but rather serve as a competitive unit vying against the cartels of other axons.Classic studies on the visual system by Hubel and Wiesel were the fi rst to suggest that competition in fact was driving synaptic reorganization in the developing brain During development the ocular dominance columns' organization is less obvious because there is overlap in the thalamic inputs driven by the right and left eye to layer IV. Anatomically as development proceeds each III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT eye's columns become narrower and eventually almost nonoverlapping (especially in primates). Even though the narrowing in the widths of right and left eye ocular dominance columns is likely due to the loss of axonal branches in overlapping regions The most interesting aspect of this segregation is that the gradual removal of overlap in the two eyes' input streams leading to equally sized ocular dominance columns is not inevitable. Hubel and Wiesel showed that during a developmental critical period in early postnatal life, the widths of these columns can be dramatically and permanently changed by alterations in the relative amounts of visual experience in the two eyes. In particular, the outcome of the segregation can be radically skewed in favor of one eye if the activity of the other eye is decreased (e.g., by patching one eye). This monocular deprivation results in larger columns for the open eye and smaller columns for the deprived eye One idea is that during the critical period, thalamic afferents driven by the two eyes compete for control of the cortical neurons that they share temporarily. If each eye has the same average amount of activity, each ended up with similar amounts of cortical territory. However, if there were imbalances between the eyes in terms of visual experience, the outcome tipped the segregation in favor of one eye over the other. The skewing that resulted from depriving one eye of vision was due both to additional losses in the connections driven by the inactive eye (shrinking its ocular dominance columns) and to additional maintenance of the connections from the normally active nondeprived eye (maintaining its columns at the wider width it had at an earlier age) Though these conclusions appear straightforward, the roles of activity in cortical refi nements may need reevaluation as new investigations show that the mechanisms may be more complicated than originally imagined. In studies of the rodent visual system, evidence suggests roles for both activity dependent and independent factors in developmental axonal refi nements. Although mice lack ocular dominance columns, they do have a binocular cortical region that becomes progressively smaller as development proceeds. This shrinkage can be shifted with monocular deprivation during a critical period In mouse visual cortex it has also been possible to study the sharpening of the retinotopic map in early postnatal life. The small receptive fi elds seen in adult visual cortex emerge from shrinkage of receptive fi eld size in development Separation of the inputs from the two eyes occurs twice in the visual system. Prior to the emergence of cortical ocular dominance columns, eye input to the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus segregates into layers rather than columns. In embryonic cats, axon terminals of ganglion cells from the two eyes overlap extensively within the lateral geniculate nucleus before gradually segregating to form the characteristic eye-specifi c layers by birth. As in the cortex, this refi nement process involves both the retraction of axonal branches from inappropriate regions of the geniculate nucleus and the elaboration of processes within the correct eye layer It is likely that spontaneous activity as opposed to actual visual experience is important in the segregation of retinogeniculate connections in the thalamus. This view is based on the fact that in cats, ferrets, and monkeys the eye specifi c layers are established well before the retina is sensitive to light and is dependent on the spontaneous activity of these inputs. What information may be contained in the spontaneous activity patterns of immature retinas that could lead to eye-specifi c lamination? Electrophysiological recordings and Ca ++ imaging studies demonstrate that each immature retina generates correlated propagating waves A particularly clear example of synapse elimination in the developing CNS is the climbing fi ber input onto cerebellar Purkinje cells. Climbing fi bers are the terminals of the axons arriving from inferior olive neurons that form strong synaptic connections to Purkinje cells. In adults only one climbing fi ber innervates each Purkinje cell. That input might contain 500 synaptic boutons that tightly invest the large ascending proximal dendrite. Immature climbing fi bers on the other hand form fewer synapses, mostly on the    Purkinje cell soma, and many climbing fi bers project to each Purkinje cell in the fi rst postnatal week (in rodents). The transition from multiple innervation to single innervation of individual Purkinje cells occurs at the same time there is a change in the number of Purkinje cells innervated by each climbing fi ber. This "neural unit" shrinkage is remarkably analogous to the reduction in the size of motor units in the peripheral nervous system. Thus, one olivocerebellar axon may give rise to branches that innervate more than 100 Purkinje cells during the fi rst postnatal week but over the next several weeks its projection is trimmed to only ∼7 Purkinje cells It has long been appreciated that the loss of climbing fi ber inputs depends on the presence of parallel fi ber innervation from granule cells of the distal part of the Purkinje cell arbor. Elimination of granule cell inputs to Purkinje cells by X irradiation, viral infection, or in mutants such as reeler, weaver, and staggerer results in a higher incidence of Purkinje cells that are multiply innervated by climbing fi bers in adulthood. Some studies suggest that the activity of the parallel fi ber input is the important parameter. Perturbation of activity along the parallel fi ber-Purkinje cell pathway in mGluR1 and GluRd2 knockouts mice or application of NMDA receptor antagonists all inhibit the elimination of climbing fi bers In many parts of the central and peripheral nervous system the divergence and convergence of synaptic circuits is decreased. A popular hypothesis, albeit still somewhat perplexing, is that neural activity differences between axons underlies synapse elimination. This hypothesis has driven researchers to try many kinds of experiments to test activity's role. At present, the precise way in which electrical activity exerts an infl uence on the synapse elimination process remains a central and unresolved question.In this chapter, we presented evidence to demonstrate that synapse elimination is a powerful force that can refi ne synaptic circuits in young animals, based on interneuronal competition. Is there any reason to think it has more than a strictly developmental phenomenon? The most important form of adult plasticity must certainly be memory. Might synapse elimination have something to do with memory? A number of neurobiologists, including Because postsynaptic cells appear to be the intermediary in synaptic competition leading to axonal removal (see earlier), once an axon's synaptic drive to a postsynaptic cell is removed, it can no longer have any infl uence on the synaptic connections of the other axons that remain connected. Complete loss of infl uence following synaptic disconnection is thus a plausible explanation for the fi nite length of critical periods. For example, once all the inputs driven by an eye deprived of vision are eliminated, return of visual experience in that eye can no longer cause a shift in ocular dominance columns if that shift is mediated via activation of postsynaptic cells. The same argument could also be made for memory. Memories have a kind of indelibility that prevents more recent memories from "overwriting" prior ones. Input elimination is an attractive means of assuring indelibility because by eliminating competing (i.e., asynchronously fi ring) inputs, a circuit becomes sheltered from disruption by different activity patterns.A model of memory based on this kind of synapse elimination, however, would require that axonal inputs continue to be eliminated in the adult brain. That critical periods in the visual system are strictly developmental can be used as an argument against the idea that these kinds of changes may underlie adult memory. On the other hand, critical periods in the visual system tend to be prolonged in proportion to their distance from the input. For example, critical periods for higher visual processing areas occur later in development than in those areas that are more proximal in the visual pathway. The loss of overlapping connections is known to occur prenatally within thalamic circuitry well before segregation in layer IV primary visual cortex, and higher anatomical levels in the visual cortex that receive input from layer IV segregate out later than layer IV. A possible explanation for this sequential crystallization of brain regions may be that synapse elimination can occur only when a cohort of synchronous inputs work together to drive the elimination of competing inputs. Such a collection of synchronously active neurons requires that the presynaptic input to these cells has itself sorted out. It also is the case that the length of the critical periods for vision are vastly longer in humans than other mammals, as is the rest of our neotenic development. For example, whereas our closest animal relatives fi nish the critical period for monocular deprivation by 7 months of age, in humans monocular deprivation can affect visual acuity even in children 6 to 7 years old.We would not like to give the impression that naturally occurring synapse elimination at developing systems is the equivalent of learning and memory. But, as neurobiologists who have studied this phenomenon and mulled these ideas over for many years, we have come to the conclusion that permanent loss of axonal input is an attractive mechanism for information storage. Whether our bias is reasonable based on the data or rather due to structural elimination of competing hypotheses from our brains, we do not know. stages in neuronal development, when the dendritic arbor is still very simple, retinal axon stimulation results in Ca ++ signals that spread throughout the cell, but Ca ++ signals become more spatially restricted as neurons mature Studies using Drosophila genetics have been instrumental in the identifi cation of core programs that control dendrite development. The dendritic arborization (da) neurons, a group of Drosophila sensory neurons with a stereotyped dendritic branching III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT pattern, have provided a useful assay system for the genetic dissection of dendrite development A striking feature of the nervous system is that there are many different types of neurons, each with a characteristic and recognizable dendritic arborization pattern. How do neurons acquire their type-specifi c dendritic morphology? Studies with Drosophila da neurons indicate that transcription factors are important regulators of the size and complexity of dendritic fi elds and the logic of their usage is beginning to emerge. Each hemi-segment of the abdomen of the Drosophila embryo or larva has 15 da neurons that can be subdivided into four classes based on their dendritic morphology In some cases, the "dendritic fate" of a particular neuron can be specifi ed by a single transcription factor. For example, Hamlet functions as a binary switch between the elaborate multiple dendritic morphology of da neuron and the single, unbranched dendritic morphology of external sensory (es) neuron In most cases, however, the dendritic fate is determined by the combined action of multiple transcription factors. Expression of the gene cut in the da neurons differs such that neurons with small and simple dendritic arbors either do not express Cut (class I neurons) or express low levels of Cut (class II), whereas neurons with more complex dendritic branching patterns and lxarger dendritic fi elds (class III and IV) express higher levels of Cut. Analysis of loss-offunction mutations and class-specifi c overexpression of Cut demonstrated that the level of Cut expression controls the distinct, class-specifi c patterns of dendritic branching In contrast to Cut, Spineless (ss), the Drosophila homologue of the mammalian dioxin receptor, is expressed at similar levels in all da neurons. In ss mutants, different classes of da neurons elaborate dendrites with similar branch numbers and complexities ( Dendro-dendritic interaction can have a profound infl uence on determining the size and shape of the dendritic fi eld as well as the spatial relationship between different dendritic fi elds. In many areas of the nervous system, dendrites of different types of neurons are intermingled and packed into a tight space. This arrangement is not random but well organized. At least three mechanisms contribute to the orderly organization of dendritic fi elds: self-avoidance, tiling, and coexistence. Dendrites of a neuron rarely bundle together or crossover one another (self-avoidance). Presumably, self-avoidance contributes to maximal dispersion of a neuron's dendritic arbor for effi cient and unambiguous signal processing. Certain types of neuron also exhibit a phenomenon known as tiling, which refers to the avoidance between the dendrites of adjacent neurons of the same type. This proper tie allows neurons to cover large areas of the nervous system like tiles covering a fl oor, completely and without redundancy. Tiling was fi rst discovered in III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT stabilization or destabilization of branches might be one important mechanism to shape dendritic arbors. Studies of Drosophila class IV da neurons revealed that dendritic fi elds are actively maintained and there is a genetic program used to maintain dendritic fi elds. The tumor suppressor Warts (Wts), as well as the Polycomb group of genes are required for the maintenance of the class IV da dendrites.Drosophila has two NDR (nuclear Dbf2-related) families of kinase: Trc and Wts. Wts and its positive regulator Salvador originally were identifi ed as tumor suppressor genes that function to coordinate cell proliferation and cell death. Loss-of-function mutants of either gene causes a progressive defect in the maintenance of the dendritic arbors, resulting in large gaps in the receptive fi elds How are the establishment and maintenance of dendritic fi elds coordinated? In Drosophila class IV neurons, the Ste-20-related tumor suppressor kinase Hippo (Hpo) can directly phosphorylate and regulate both Trc, which functions in the establishment of dendritic tiling, and Wts, which functions in the maintenance of dendritic tiling What might be the downstream genes regulated by Wts? In the Drosophila retina, Wts regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by phosphorylating the transcriptional coactivator Yorkie Much of our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of dendritic growth control in vertebrates comes from investigations in the developing cerebral cortex. Most cortical neurons are generated from precursors proliferating in the germinal zones lining the ventricle Dendritic differentiation, as determined by expression of dendrite-specifi c genes such as MAP-2, does not begin until the cells have completed their migration. Following migration, pyramidal neurons extend an axon toward the ventricle and an apical dendrite toward the pial surface. To test the role of the local cortical environment in directing the growth of nascent axons and dendrites, Polleux and Ghosh developed an in vitro assay in which dissociated neurons from a donor cortex were plated onto cortical slices in organotypic cultures. Strikingly, neurons plated on cortical slices behave just like the endogenous pyramidal neurons and extend an axon toward the ventricular zone and an apical dendrite toward the pial surface. Both the oriented growth of the axon and the apical dendrite are regulated by the chemotropic signal Sema 3A, which is present at high levels near the pial surface, and acts as a chemorepellant for axons and a chemoattractant for dendrites wts-/-FIGURE 21.3 Dendritic fi elds are largely unchanged once established during development. Late-onset dendritic loss in Drosophila warts mutants (wts-/-) in late larval stages. Live images of wild-type (WT) and wts mutant (wts) dendrites of class IV da neurons at different times after egg laying (AEL). In wts mutants, dendrites initially tile the body wall normally but progressively lose branches at later larval stages. Adapted from The differential response of axons and dendrites to Sema3A led The nonreceptor tyrosine kinases Fyn and Cdk5 also play important roles in mediating the effects of Sema3A on cortical dendrite orientation In addition to restricting length, Notch signaling in cortical neurons has a major infl uence on dendritic branching In a search for other extracellular cues that regulate dendrite development, Whitford et al. discovered that Slit proteins simultaneously repel pyramidal neuron axons and stimulate dendrite growth and branching Another illustration of the ability of individual signals to control diverse biological responses including the control of axonal and dendritic development is provided by the WNT family of secreted proteins. The WNTs represent a large family of extracellular cues initially identifi ed as potent morphogens involved in patterning organ development in both invertebrates and vertebrates. WNTs also have been shown to regulate cell proliferation, migration, and survival Dendrites play a critical role in information processing in the nervous system as substrates for synapse formation and signal integration. Neurons have highly branched, cell type-specifi c dendritic trees (or dendritic arbors), that determine the spatial extent and types of afferent input that the neurons receive This chapter is written with a special emphasis on the regulation of dendritic arbor structure in the context of the developing neuronal circuits. After a brief description of dendritic arbor development, we present representative molecular and cellular mechanisms governing dendrite arbor architecture.Dendritic arbor development requires global, arborwide architectural modifi cations (e.g., generalized arbor growth) as well as localized structural changes (e.g., sprouting and retraction of high order branches). Furthermore, some changes in dendritic arbor morphology may occur rapidly in response to synaptic inputs or growth factors, whereas others may occur with some time-delay, secondary to new gene transcription. These general organizational principles of dendritic fi elds can be studied in Drosophila da neurons. Their dendrites show self-avoidance and tend to spread out. Of the four classes of da neurons, class III and class IV neurons show tiling Dscam, a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily, originally was identifi ed as an axon guidance receptor. Alternative splicing can potentially generate over 38 thousand isoforms Dscam is necessary for da neuron dendrite selfavoidance. Mutant neurons devoid of Dscam exhibit dendrite bundling and a crossing-over phenotype. This self-avoidance phenotype can be rescued largely by expressing a randomly selected single isoform in the neuron, suggesting that it is necessary to have Dscam in the da neuron for their dendritic selfavoidance but the particular isoform is not important In contrast, tiling does not seem to be affected in Dscam mutants. Thus, tiling requires some cell surface recognition molecules other than Dscam to mediate the homotypic repulsion between neurons of the same type. Although the signal(s) that mediate tiling behavior remain to be identifi ed, the evolutionarily conserved protein kinase Tricornered (Trc) and the putative adaptor protein Furry (Fry), have been identifi ed as important components of the intracellular signaling cascade involved in tiling Given that a neuron's dendrites can self-avoid as long as it has at least one Dscam isoform and it doesn't matter what particular isoform is expressed, what might be the reason for having such large number of potential isoforms? One idea is that a given neuron would express a small number of Dscam isoforms (a dozen or so) more or less stochastically Dendrite development is a dynamic process involving both growth and retraction. Thus, selective is a member of the Src family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases. Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5), a member of the serine/threonine kinase Cdk family, has enzymatic activity only in postmitotic neurons due to a neuron-specifi c expression of the regulatory subunit p35 The generality of the concept of dendritic guidance is supported by studies in Drosophila on the role of Netrin-Frazzled signaling in axonal and dendritic development The growth and branching of dendrites can be infl uenced by a large number of extracellular signals Studies from the last few years provide compelling evidence that the growth and branching of dendritic arbors is regulated by extracellular signals, including neurotrophic factors. Neurotrophins (NGF, BDNF, NT-3, and NT-4) exert their effects through the Trk family of tyrosine kinase receptors. Experiments in which the effects of neurotrophins on dendritic growth control have been examined in slice cultures indicate that in general, neurotrophins increase the dendritic complexity of pyramidal neurons by increasing total dendritic length, the number of branchpoints, and/or the number of primary dendrites Recently, Osteogenic Protein-1 (OP-1), which is a member of the transforming growth-factor-beta superfamily, was shown to increase total dendritic growth and branching from dissociated embryonic cortical neurons (Le How do neurotrophic factors mediate the morphological changes linked with dendritic remodeling? The observed short-term dynamics indicate a rapid modulation of cytoskeletal elements by neurotrophic factor signaling. Of the major signaling pathways activated by Trk receptors and most other tyrosine kinase receptors, the MAP kinase and PI-3Kinase pathways have been implicated in neurite formation in both neuronal cell lines and primary neurons Part of the neurotrophic factor effect on dendritic morphogenesis may also include their control of expression of structural proteins, since long-term exposure to neurotrophins leads to net dendritic growth. It was reported recently that BDNF can upregulate local protein synthesis in dendrites within hours The diversity of signals that can infl uence dendritic morphology is underscored by a series of studies on the role of mammalian Notch proteins in regulating dendritic growth and branching. Originally identifi ed in Drosophila, Notch is a type I cell-surface protein, which functions as a receptor. Proteolytic processing of full-length Notch generates two fragments that associate at the plasma membrane to form a receptor complex. The mechanism of Notch receptor activation involves cleavage and nuclear translocation of the intracellular domain of the receptor (reviewed in The dendritic cytoskeleton is composed of bundles of microtubules extending within the center of the dendritic shaft, a cortex of actin sandwiched between the microtubular bundles and the plasma membrane, and an actin matrix at the tip of dendritic processes. Fine terminal dendritic branches, or fi lopodia, have actin fi laments as their sole cytockeletal component (reviewed in The Rho GTPases regulate the cytoskeleton in all cell types, however the elaborate and plastic structure of neurons poses particularly fascinating regulatory constraints on GTPase signaling As more refi ned methods are used to probe the molecular and cellular basis of structural plasticity, our understanding of the intricate web of control becomes more complete. A striking example is that of the in vivo dendritic arbor development of optic tectal neurons in Xenopus. These neurons respond to stimulation of the tadpole visual system with an increased dendritic arbor growth rate, which requires glutamate receptor activity Branch formation requires the regulation of local cortical actin dynamics to create protrusive forces that allow fi lopodial sprouting III. NERVOUS SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT transcription factors Su(H) (CBF1/RBP-Jk) and E(Spl) (Hes1-5) have been isolated The possibility that Notch might play a role in regulating dendritic patterning was suggested by immunocytochemical localization studies that showed that mammalian Notch1 is expressed by both dividing cells in the ventricular zone (VZ) and postmitotic neurons interplay between actin and microtubules is then fundamental for the cellular events leading to changes in dendritic architecture. Importantly, in nonneuronal cells, the activity of Rho GTPases not only induces changes in both actin and microtubules but is also itself modifi ed by alterations in the dynamics of the two cytoskeletons, thus serving as the regulator for the interplay between actin and microtubules It is tempting to hypothesize that in response to activity, the role of RhoA in regulating extension of branches relies on its capacity to control microtubule stabilization (e.g., via mDia; Rho GTPases are distributed ubiquitously throughout the neuronal cytoplasm GEFs also play important roles in regulating dendrite arbor structure. For instance, Tiam1, a Rac-GEF, is located in dendrites and in particular in spines in cortical and hippocampal neurons. Tiam is noteworthy because it associates with the NMDA receptor, is phosphorylated in a calcium-and NMDA receptor-dependent manner and is required for dendritic arbor development Inhibition of the WNT pathway by SFRP1 (a secreted antagonist of WNT proteins) decreases Rac activation by WNT7B and blocks the effect of WNT7B in dendrite development One of the central challenges in the study of dendritic development is to understand how extracellular cues that regulate dendritic branching are integrated with Ca 2+ activity-dependent signals. A potential clue comes from recent results exploring the role of bcatenin and cadherins in dendritic branching These observations are reinforced by the recent demonstration that another class of cadherins (Celsr1-3) regulates dendritic branching of cortical pyramidal neurons One of the most striking manifestations of the effects of experience on brain development is the effect sensory input has on dendritic development. Dendrites tend to extend toward sources of afferent input, for instance in the barrel fi eld of somatosensory cortex 