stretches individual muscles. For rhythmic movements such as walking, these recurring "multisensory" feedback signals often reinforce activity of CPG circuits. However, when a perturbation occurs during the movement, the resulting sensory signal may evoke a refl ex motor response that alters the movement. Many of these refl ex responses adapt the movement in an appropriate way to proceed under the changed environmental conditions. Most sensory afferents produce these refl ex effects through interneuronal circuits. (The stretch refl ex is an exception.) The excitability of many of these interneuronal circuits usually is modulated during movement, allowing refl exes to be suppressed or enhanced at different phases. CPGs are one source of this phase modulation. Many refl exes can also be elicited when the organism is not moving, and in these situations the refl ex tends to exhibit a more stereotyped motor pattern.Ultimately movement is carried out by muscles, and the motor commands from the central nervous system must be transmitted to motor neurons that innervate the muscles. The organization of motor neurons into pools, and the manner in which motor neurons properties are matched to contractile and metabolic properties of the muscle fi bers simplify many of the variables needed to be controlled to produce smooth movements with precise amounts of force. Feedback from sensory receptors of the muscle play a key role in monitoring the force and stretch of the muscle. This section will cover some of the basic properties of motor neurons, muscle, and muscle receptors.Motor neurons are located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. The pool of motor neurons that innervates an individual muscle forms an elongated column that typically extends over two or three spinal cord segments. Intermingled among the large a-motor neurons that innervate skeletal muscle fi bers are smaller gmotor neurons, which innervate muscle spindles, as well as b-motor neurons, which dually innervate skeletal muscle and spindles. The a-motor neurons are the largest neurons in the spinal cord, with myelinated axons that exit the spinal cord through the ventral roots and travel in peripheral nerves to innervate muscles. Their axons also give off small branches within the spinal cord, called recurrent collaterals, that synapse on inhibitory interneurons, called Renshaw cells, and motor neurons. The extensive dendritic tree of motor neurons extends into the dorsal and ventral horns, receiving thousands of synaptic inputs from excitatory and inhibitory neurons ( Movement is achieved by the contraction of muscles that are attached to the skeleton or soft tissues, such as muscles producing facial expressions. A skeletal muscle is made up of thousands of individual muscle fi bers. Each muscle fi ber is a multinucleated cell, a few centimeters long, that contains the contractile proteins, actin and myosin, arranged into thick and thin fi laments in repeating units called sarcomeres The process of muscle contraction begins with an action potential in the motor axon that causes release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction. In mammals, normally every spike in the motor axon produces an action potential in the muscle fi ber because an excess amount of acetylcholine is released (Box 29.2). In adult mammals, each skeletal muscle fi ber has one neuromuscular junction innervated by one motor neuron. Muscle fi ber action potentials lead to the activation of voltage-gated calcium channels in the membrane that interact with calcium release proteins in the sarcoplasmic reticulum, an organelle in the muscle fi ber that stores and releases calcium near the sarcomeres. This interaction couples excitation to muscle contraction. Other proteins in the sarcoplasmic reticulum reuptake calcium, leading to relaxation. Muscle fi bers are classifi ed into types according to their contractile and metabolic properties. Contractile properties refer to the muscle fi ber's speed of contraction and relaxation, and the specifi c force it can produce. Contractile properties are mainly determined by the isoform of myosin that is expressed by the muscle fi ber, particularly the myosin heavy chain gene, although the genes for other proteins associated with the sarcomere and the sarcoplasmic reticulum are expressed in fi ber-type specifi c patterns that match the properties of the myosin isoform. The contractile properties of a muscle fi ber are classifi ed as slow twitch or fast twitch. Metabolic properties refer to whether aerobic or anaerobic pathways are used to produce energy (ATP) from fuels. Muscle fi bers with abundant mitochondria are able to use oxidative (aerobic) metabolism, which provides relative resistance to fatigue as long as there is a good blood supply. Muscle fi bers with few mitochondria rely on stored fuel, such as glycogen, which can more easily be depleted and also produces lactic acid as a byproduct of glycolysis.There are three basic muscle fi bers types in adult skeletal muscle. Type I fi bers have a slow twitch but have a good capacity for oxidative metabolism. Type IIA fi bers have a fast twitch and can use both aerobic and anaerobic metabolism, giving them an intermediate resistance to fatigue. Type IIB fi bers produce a fast twitch, but rely mainly on anaerobic glycolysis for their energy. Most muscles contain a mixture of all three fi ber types, in proportions that refl ect the typical usage of the muscle.A "motor unit" is defi ned as one motor neuron and all the muscle fi bers it innervates. In mammals, each muscle fi ber is innervated by only one motor neuron, but one motor neuron innervates many muscle fi bers as its axon branches in the muscle. However, all muscle fi bers of one motor unit are of the same fi ber type. Motor units cluster into three basic types based on the three physiological properties of twitch speed, the amount of force produced, and fatigability ( The physiological properties of the motor neurons and the muscle fi bers they innervate are closely matched. Type S motor neurons innervate Type I fi bers. Type S motor neurons have small cell bodies and dendritic arbors, allowing them to be depolarized easily. Afterhyperpolarization following each motor neuron spike promotes a steady rate of fi ring that allows forces produced by successive twitches of the muscle fi bers to summate Normally every action potential of the motor axon releases more than enough transmitter than is needed to produces a muscle fi ber action potential. This occurs because both the amount of transmitter released from the presynaptic motor axon terminal and the density of AChRs on the postsynaptic muscle fi ber exceed that needed to produce an end plate potential (EPP) large enough to initiate a muscle fi ber action potential. Genetic or acquired diseases that reduce the safety factor of neuromuscular transmission are called myasthenic disorders ( Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are extremely rare, but provide important insights into the function of components of the neuromuscular junction. Postsynaptic CMS stem from a defi ciency and/or altered kinetic properties of the AChR. More than 40 different mutations in subunits of the AChR have been described. Most mutations decrease subunit expression or prevent subunit assembly or glycosylation, leading to reduced numbers of functioning AChRs and thereby smaller EPPs. In fast channel CMS, mutations produce decreased binding affi nity for ACh, leading to a smaller quantal response and miniature EPP amplitude, without reducing the numbers of AChRs. In contrast, the slow channel CMS stem from mutations that prolong the channel opening episodes. Slow channel mutations cause depolarization block due to temporal summation of the prolonged EPPs. In the long term, cationic overloading of the postsynaptic region leads to destruction of the junctional folds and loss of AChRs. Presynaptic CMS are less common. They are caused by mutations that lead to a paucity of synaptic vesicles or defects in ACh resynthesis or vesicular packaging. As a result, fewer vesicles are released or fewer ACh molecules are contained in each vesicle, and EPPs are smaller. Identifying CMS as involving pre-or postsynaptic components and understanding how these alterations affect neuromuscular transmission are necessary for developing rational therapies for these disorders.steady fi ring rates and resistance to fatigue, Type S motor units are optimal for the sustained fi ring needed for postural and tonic movements. Each Type S unit individually contributes only a small amount of force to a muscle's contraction, but typically Type S units make up a large proportion of the motor units innervating a muscle. In contrast, Type F motor neurons have large cell bodies and dendritic arbors, shorter afterhyperpolarizations and somewhat faster fi ring rates. Type FR motor neurons innervate Type IIA muscle fi bers, and Type FF motor neurons innervate Type IIB muscle fi bers. Type FR motor units are optimal for fast, powerful movements. Type FF units are used mainly in movements that require brief bursts of muscle strength. Most muscles contain a mixture of motor unit types, intermingled in a mosaic pattern.Most movements don't require a muscle to contract at its maximal strength, and only a fraction of the hundred or more motor neurons in the pool that (B) Maximal force produced by repetitive stimulation of the motor neuron to produce an unfused tetanus. In addition to differences in maximal force, the "sag" property, a dropping off of tension during maintained stimulation, is seen in innervates that muscle will need to fi re. For most movements, motor units are recruited in an orderly sequence, fi rst described by distributed to every motor neuron in the pool, alternative recruitment sequences are possible.Stronger muscle contractions are produced not only by recruitment of additional motor units, but also by increasing the fi ring rates of motor units that are already actively fi ring. The relative use of recruitment and rate modulation to maintain a desired profi le of force varies according to the muscle and the level of force. In some muscles, such as the small hand muscles, several motor units begin fi ring at low levels of force, and fi ne gradations of force are controlled by modulating their fi ring rates. In other muscles, recruitment and rate coding occur together in a more balanced fashion throughout the working force range of the muscle.Muscles contain two kinds of specialized sensory receptors that provide feedback to the spinal cord and brain. Muscle spindles sense muscle stretch or length, and Golgi tendon organs (GTOs) sense the load upon the muscle Golgi tendon organs lie at the junction of the muscle and tendon, in series with the muscle. GTOs are sensitive to the forces generated by muscle contraction against a load. Each GTO senses the force generated by a small number of motor units that insert onto a local region of the tendon. The axons of the GTOs are called Ib afferents. Like Ia afferents, they are large myelinated axons with fast conduction veloc-686The muscle stretch refl ex plays an important role in providing feedback during movements. The stretch refl ex consists of a monosynaptic response from the direct connection between Ia afferents and motor neurons, which may be followed by polysynaptic refl ex activity. At rest, the stretch refl ex can be obtained by a quick stretch, such as by tapping on a muscle tendon, which produces a burst of action potentials in the Ia spindle afferents If the stretch refl ex is elicited during movement, the Ia EPSPs will summate with inputs from other sources such as CPGs and descending inputs. Stretch during the phase of movement when the muscle is active will add to other sources of motor neuron depolarization, and the refl ex motor response will enhance the ongoing contraction. Stretch of the muscle when it is out of its active phase will produce a smaller motor response, if any. In this way, the spatial summation of postsynaptic potentials contributes to phase modulation of the stretch refl ex. Additionally, there is modulation of the stretch refl ex through presynaptic inhibition of the Ia afferents during movement. This presynaptic inhibition is produced by GABA-ergic spinal interneurons that synapse on the Ia afferent terminals, forming axo-axonic synapses. Presynaptic inhibition reduces the release of glutamate from Ia afferents, leading to smaller Ia EPSPs in the motor neuron, but does not affect the size of other inputs to the motor neuron. The GABA-ergic interneurons mediating presynaptic inhibition are strongly activated by antagonist Ia afferents; that is, spindles from muscles that produce the opposite movement, as well as by CPGs and descending inputs. Thus, presynaptic inhibition of a muscle's stretch refl ex is strongest when the muscle contraction is out of phase with the movement cycle, when its antagonist muscle is contracting.Muscles are innervated by motor neurons in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. The motor unit consists of one motor neuron and all the muscle fi bers it innervates. Physiological properties of each motor neuron match the contractile and metabolic properties of its muscle fi bers. Type S motor units have slow twitch, high aerobic capabilities, and fatigue resistance. These smaller motor units are the fi rst recruited for contraction, and are heavily used for slow, sustained postural movements. Type F motor units innervate muscle fi bers with a fast twitch and are recruited for more forceful or ballistic movements. Type FR motor units use aerobic and anaerobic metabolism and are relatively resistant to fatigue. Type FF motor units use anaerobic metabolism and fatigue quickly. In the pool of motor neurons innervating a muscle, motor neurons are recruited in an orderly fashion, beginning with Type S units that generate small amounts of force, followed by units that generate greater forces. As the muscle contracts, changes in its length are detected by spindles, specialized receptors that lie within the muscle. The load on the muscle is detected by a second specialized receptor, the Golgi tendon organ. These sensory receptors of the muscle provide feedback to the spinal cord allowing refl ex changes in drive to the muscles.So far, this chapter has discussed how the output of the spinal cord produces muscle actions though the motor neurons. This section will focus on spinal interneurons -neurons with a cell body in the spinal cord and an axon that synapses on another spinal neuron.Ia spindle afferentQuadriceps muscle Motor neuron FIGURE 29.6 Basic circuitry underlying the knee-jerk stretch refl ex. Ia spindle afferents from the quadriceps muscle make monosynaptic, excitatory connections on a-motor neurons that innervate the quadriceps.• They relay sensory inputs from the periphery that may modulate the motor output.• They relay as well as modulate signals from the brain via descending pathways.• They form networks that produce patterned rhythmic activity.It is important to note that some interneurons may participate in all three functions, switching from one role to another during specifi c movements or carrying on two roles simultaneously.Historically, interneurons were identifi ed and named by their axonal projections, the location of their soma, their neurotransmitter, or by a physiological effect or refl ex that they mediated. Later, populations of neurons were identifi ed by their pattern of activity during movements, visualized using activity-dependent dyes. More recently, molecular biology tools have enabled scientists to identify interneurons based on their gene expression pattern and cell lineage. Molecular markers have been used to identify several classes of interneurons and motor neurons. Four distinct populations of interneurons, designated as V0, V1, V2, and V3, have been identifi ed in the ventral spinal cord by their developmental pattern of expression of transcription factors, proteins that regulate gene expression At the beginning of the chapter we noted that the CPG network needed to produce three fundamental features of locomotion: generation of a cyclical rhythm, coordinated alternation between antagonist fl exor and extensor muscles, and coordination between limbs. Figuring out what makes up a CPG-the neurons involved, the connections between these neurons, the synaptic interactions, and the contributions from cellular ion channels-is challenging. To tackle this problem, researchers construct models that can be tested and refi ned by experimental observations. As noted earlier, There are several neurological disorders that selectively affect motor neurons. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a hereditary disorder in which motor neurons develop normally but begin to degenerate not long after birth. Autosomal recessive SMA was described by neurologists long before its cause was known, and several different clinical phenotypes were described. SMA causing weakness in infancy was called Werdnig-Hoffman disease; SMA causing weakness later in childhood was called Kugelberg-Welander disease. Both forms of SMA are caused by a mutation in a gene called "survival of motor neuron" or SMN gene. The SMN protein is widely expressed in neurons and has a role in processing mRNAs. It is not known why motor neurons are more vulnerable to mutations of SMN than other cells. In an X-linked SMA, called Kennedy's disease or spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA), weakness begins in adult life in affected males. Motor neurons innervating facial and jaw muscles often are affected early on. The mutation in SBMA is a triplet repeat expansion in the androgen receptor gene that leads to expression of an abnormal androgen receptor. The androgen receptor is expressed in motor neurons, and over time accumulation of the abnormal receptor leads to degeneration of the motor neuron.Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, is a disease with degeneration not only of the motor neurons, but also of corticospinal neurons of the motor cortex. In most patients with ALS, the disease is not hereditary and its cause is unknown. There are a few hereditary forms of ALS that make up a small percentage of all patients with ALS. Nevertheless, the identifi cation of familial ALS (FALS) genes has provided ideas about pathways that may be responsible for causing sporadic ALS. The fi rst gene mutation identifi ed in FALS encoded the enzyme superoxide dismutase, SOD1. Studies using transgenic mice expressing the mutant SOD1 gene showed that FALS was not caused by loss of enzyme activity, but by abnormal properties of the mutant SOD1 protein. Studies expressing mutant SOD1 in different cell types are revealing that glial and infl ammatory cells may also contribute to motor neuron degeneration in FALS Reference with mutually inhibitory half-centers driving fl exors and extensors. Experimental fi ndings have led to further refi nements of the proposed organization of the CPG network. For example, the rhythm and timing of the network may be controlled separately from the patterning of the network output. In studies of locomotor rhythms in the neonatal rodent spinal cord, the CPG appears to be distributed among several spinal segments. Studies in the isolated neonatal rodent spinal cord preparation maintained in vitro Maintaining rhythmic bursting in an interneuronal network requires a source of excitatory drive. Although this drive could be provided by tonic excitation, such as from descending pathways, a more robust rhythm is possible if there are excitatory cells within the network that have intrinsic properties that allow rhythmic and repetitive fi ring (Box 29.4). At least three classes of rhythmically active excitatory interneurons have been identifi ed in the spinal cord and proposed as candidates for CPG rhythm generators. The fi rst is a population of glutamatergic neurons located throughout the rostrocaudal extent of the spinal cord that are mutually excitatory and project to neurons that inhibit their counterparts on the opposite segment of the cord. In lamprey and other nonlimbed vertebrates, these neurons play a role in generating the swimming rhythms Although these interneurons have been proposed as candidates forming the rhythm generating circuitry of the CPG, it is important to note that more work needs to be done to prove their essential role in rhythmogenesis. Not all rhythmically active neurons are components of the CPG network. Some may receive rhythmic output from CPG neurons. The critical test is to show that temporarily removing a population of interneurons affects the locomotor rhythm. Recent strategies using genetic markers that identify specifi c populations of interneurons to drive selective expression of reversible inhibitors of activity provide a potential tool to test the contribution of distinct interneuron populations to CPG networks Alternation between fl exor and extensor muscles that act across the same joint is another fundamental feature of locomotion, as well as of many other limb movements. There are several spinal interneuron circuits that act in different ways to produce reciprocal inhibition between antagonist muscles. Presynaptic inhibition of antagonist Ia afferents by GABA-ergic interneurons, described earlier, prevents spindle afferents from activating a muscle when it is stretched by the contraction of its antagonist. Another interneuron, the glycinergic Ia inhibitory interneuron (IaIN), produces postsynaptic reciprocal inhibition. The IaIN was so named because it is activated by the muscle's Ia afferents and inhibits motor neurons innervating the antagonist muscle. The IaIN synapses on the soma and main dendrites of motor neurons, producing a fast, potent IPSP that lasts only for several milliseconds. The IaIN develops from the V1 cell lineage, and can be recognized by its expression of the transcription factor En1. Almost every input that excites a motor neuron will also excite the IaINs that project to its antagonist's Experimental evidence from animal work indicates that motor neurons can participate actively in generating the rhythmic pattern observed during locomotion. Some motor neuron properties can be turned ON during locomotion due to synaptic inputs, which in turn produce nonlinear input-output relationships.For example, there is a locomotor-dependent reduction in the threshold for spike generation, resulting in higher motor neuronal excitability. Two other motor neuronal properties susceptible to interact signifi cantly with afferent inputs are the membrane potential oscillations known as locomotor-drive-potentials (LDP) and plateau potentials. LDPs are membrane potentials in motor neurons, in which a wave of depolarization during the active phase alternates with a wave of hyperpolarization during the antagonist phase of locomotion. Experiments in the cat have shown that the depolarizing phase is due to an excitatory synaptic drive and the hyperpolarizing phase is due to an inhibitory drive.Plateau potentials are a behavior of the membrane potential in which the potential jumps between two states (bistable behavior). This motor neuron behavior has been observed in animals such as the turtle, mouse, and cat. This behavior is mediated mostly by a persistent inward current which at least in part is mediated by calcium channels. Ionic currents responsible for the generation of plateau potentials in motor neurons are predominantly occurring in dendrites because they posses voltagesensitive L-type calcium conductances. These currents are turned ON by some neuromodulators such as serotonin or noradrenalin. Data from animal experiments have shown that synaptic inputs on dendrites can recruit plateau potentials and evoke sustained discharge. It is possible therefore that dendritic activation can amplify the effect of synaptic inputs from either sensory or descending afferents. Although the role of plateau potential is still unclear during normal development, one hypothesis is that motor tasks like posture or stepping recruit fatigue-resistant motor units readily with sustained discharge produced by persistent inward currents without continuous network inputs.From animal experiments there are some preliminary data that indicate that plateau potentials and sustained discharge are also found in some spinal interneurons. As in motor neurons, these plateaus are facilitated by serotonin and noradrenalin. In a similar fashion as in motor neurons, plateau potentials activated in interneurons by neuromodulators released during locomotion may act as an amplifi cation step of synaptic inputs in particular dendrites. It is possible therefore, because interneurons integrate sensory and supraspinal information, for this mechanism to be very effective in the transmission of inputs relevant for the generation of motor neuronal activities. motor neurons. For this reason, voluntary contraction of a muscle will produce inhibition of its antagonist muscle, and, likewise, the stretch refl ex of a muscle will produce inhibition of its antagonist. The excitability of IaINs is determined by their many inputs, and the strength of reciprocal inhibition can be varied to allow movements that use cocontraction. IaINs are rhythmically active during locomotion, even without feedback from muscle stretch Interlimb coordination is the third fundamental feature of locomotion. To date, the leading candidate interneurons for coordinating activity between the limbs during locomotion are several populations of commissural interneurons The recurrent collaterals of motor neurons synapse on a population of inhibitory interneurons in the ventral horn, called Renshaw cells. Renshaw cells use glycine or GABA as their transmitter and during development may contain both transmitters. Renshaw cells project back to homonymous motor neurons and synergist motor neurons in adjacent segments. They provide a negative feedback refl ex called recurrent inhibition that limits the fi ring of motor neurons. During locomotor rhythms, Renshaw cells are rhythmically active, as expected since they receive rhythmic synaptic inputs from motor neurons. Their role in voluntary movements is uncertain, but one possibility is that they enhance the contrast between the active motor neurons and quiescent synergist motor neurons in adjacent segments. Renshaw cells arise from the V1 cell lineage, as do IaINs. During development, Renshaw cells, like IaINs, receive input from Ia afferents In addition to serving as relays for sensory and descending pathways, interneurons of the spine interconnect to form CPG networks that can produce rhythmic fi ring. Several models of the CPG network have been proposed to guide experimenters. There has been signifi cant progress in unraveling the interneuronal network that forms the spinal central pattern generator for locomotion. New experimental techniques have Schematic model with some of the known candidate interneurons that are involved in the modulation of the mammalian locomotor CPG. Excitatory interneurons (red) with rhythmic activity include classes of commissural interneurons (CIN) and the interneurons identifi ed by expression of the HB9 transcription factor. Inhibitory interneurons (blue) that participate in termination of excitatory bursts include the Renshaw (Ren), the Ia interneuron (IaIN), and some commissural interneurons (CIN). Modifi ed from Neural circuits in the brainstem, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex are activated with locomotion and other movements. For locomotion, the cerebral cortex not only formulates conscious decisions about initiating and maintaining walking, but plays a role in adaptations of gait, particularly visually guided walking. Recordings from corticospinal neurons in cats as they stepped over obstacles placed in their fi eld of vision showed that many corticospinal neurons changed their fi ring rates, often with a timing appropriate for driving the altered contraction patterns of specifi c muscles The brain transmits signals for movement to the spinal cord through several descending fi ber tracts: corticospinal, vestibulospinal, and reticulospinal, as described in earlier chapters. For locomotion, supraspinal regions are thought to activate spinal cord CPGs through brainstem relays. In decerebrate cats, electrical stimulation of several areas of the brain can elicit stepping. These include the diencephalon and cerebellum, but the most critical region is an area in the brain stem near the pedunculopontine nucleus known as the mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR). The MLR receives inputs from several forebrain regions, including the basal ganglia. The MLR does not connect directly to spinal CPG neurons, but synapses on reticulospinal neurons in the pons and medulla that receive a wide variety of sensory and descending inputs. Some of the reticulospinal axons in the pontomedullary formation travel in the ventral and ventrolateral tracts (funiculi) of the spinal cord. Lesions of these funiculi disrupt the ability to initiate and maintain locomotion.Sparing of at least some fi bers in the ventrolateral funiculus markedly improves locomotor recovery after spinal lesions in cats In addition to their role in triggering rapid changes in locomotion and regulating postural balance, descending fi ber systems also modulate physiological properties of spinal neurons. For instance, the plateau potentials and bistability in motor neurons (Box 29.4) depend on tonic activity in descending serotonergic pathways. Stimulation of the dorsolateral funiculus of the spinal cord in turtles, an area which is thought to contain descending pathways from the raphe nucleus, increased the excitability of motor neurons and promoted plateau potentials.Although spinal CPGs can generate the basic pattern of neural activity that organizes muscle contractions into a recognizable movement such as locomotion, the fi nal pattern is fi ne-tuned by sensory inputs as well as descending systems. As noted earlier, most sensory inputs affect motor neurons through polysynaptic, interneuronal circuits. The interneurons that process sensory information typically integrate sensory signals with inputs from a variety of sources, including from CPG networks and descending pathways. As a result the refl ex motor response can vary depending on the phase of the movement cycle, or it may occur only when the animal is in the "state" of moving, or it may even be reversed between resting and active states. Earlier we discussed the muscle sensory receptors and some of the refl ex changes they mediate. This last section will present a sampling of other sensory refl ex pathways.A wide variety of sensory stimuli can evoke refl ex fl exion of the limb. Flexor refl exes may have several roles: they serve a protective function, refl exively withdrawing the limb from potentially harmful stimuli, and they may be used in movements that require coordinated multijoint fl exor movements. Usually the refl ex consists of contraction of muscles that fl ex several joints coupled with relaxation of muscles that extend those joints. Extension of the contralateral limb may also occur. Flexor refl exes can be elicited by group II and III muscle afferents, joint afferents, and high-and low-threshold cutaneous afferents. Because these Human walking is a complex behavior that is based on integration of activity from descending supraspinal motor commands, spinal neuronal circuitries, and sensory feedback. Accumulating evidence suggests that humans, as well as other species, have a network in the spinal cord that is capable of generating basic rhythmic walking activity. Rhythmic leg movements can be induced by epidural electrical stimulation after a clinically complete spinal cord injury (SCI). Also, spontaneous involuntary rhythmic leg movements have been reported after a clinically complete and incomplete SCI. However, even though this evidence points to the existence of a CPG network in humans, in all these cases sensory input likely contributed to the rhythm generation. Furthermore, clinically complete injuries are not always anatomically complete. Therefore, the evidence for existence of a CPG in humans remains indirect.Noninvasive electrophysiological techniques have provided information about how certain brain structures contribute to human walking. For example, the involvement of the primary motor cortex, where the corticospinal tract originates, has been demonstrated, in part, with transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Several groups have found changes in the size of motor evoked potentials (MEP) in lower limb muscles elicited by TMS during walking, showing that transmission in the corticospinal tract is modulated during the gait cycle. However, TMS of the motor cortex activates cells with monosynaptic or polysynaptic connections to the spinal motor neurons. The size of the MEPs elicited by TMS refl ects not only cortical excitability changes, but also changes at a subcortical level. To more precisely identify the various sites activated by the magnetic stimulus, During human walking, sensory feedback plays an important role in driving the active motor neurons and providing error signals to the brain that can be used to adapt and update the gait pattern. In healthy humans, a study in which a plantarfl exion perturbation was induced during the stance phase of the gait cycle provides clear evidence for this. This experiment showed a drop in electromyographic (EMG) activity in the plantarfl exor muscles, even when the common peroneal nerve that innervates the ankle dorsifl exor muscles was blocked by local anesthesia In summary, in recent years a combination of neurophysiological techniques has provided important insights that have improved our understanding about the neural control of human walking. Human walking is based on the integration of activities from spinal circuitry, sensory feedback, and descending motor commands. afferents elicit a common action, they are sometimes called fl exor refl ex afferents (FRAs). The muscles activated by the sensory stimulus respond with short and long latency bursts of contraction. These contraction components are thought to be generated by distinct interneuron circuits. The late components can be differentially enhanced by treatment with L-dopa in spinalized animals. It has been suggested that interneurons mediating the late fl exor refl ex could function as a half-center for fl exion, as proposed in models of the locomotor CPG.In contrast to the widely distributed fl exor refl ex, there are a number of refl exes in which stimulation of small areas of skin evokes a refl ex limited to a few muscles. One example of a local cutaneous refl ex is the stumbling corrective reaction. When the skin on the top of the foot is stimulated during walking, the foot is lifted higher, as if to step over an obstacle. The stumbling corrective reaction is phase dependent, occurring only when the limb is in the swing phase of the step cycle. This and several other local cutaneous refl exes are oligosynaptic, involving only a few interneurons. The last-order interneurons in these cutaneous refl exes connect with relatively limited sets of motor neurons. It has been proposed that such interneurons offer a means to control or alter activity of specifi c muscles during movement without involving the interneurons of pattern generating circuitry.Several areas of the brain give rise to descending pathways that connect to spinal interneurons and, to varying extents in different species, motor neurons. Areas of the brainstem are critical for relaying descending commands for locomotion. Volitional movements also seem to employ spinal interneuron circuits for organizing routine patterns of muscle contraction, within the context of a planned goal. Sensory feedback from skin, joints, and most muscle afferents also provide fi ne-tuning of basic movement patterns. The refl ex motor responses evoked by most sensory afferent are relayed through interneurons. Over the last decade many studies have reported adaptive changes in spinal cord refl ex circuits in animal and humans. Short-and long-term adaptations have been associated with the acquisition and learning of new motor skills. One of the pathways that has been investigated is the spinal stretch refl ex (SSR) and its electrical analog, the H-refl ex (Hoffman refl ex). Operant conditioning has been used to show that descending activity from the brain can induce adaptations of the SSR and the H-refl ex. In an operant conditioning protocol, monkeys, humans, and rats can gradually decrease (down-conditioning) or increase (up-conditioning) the size of the SSR or the Hrefl ex The size of the SSR and the H-refl ex is also affected by the nature, intensity, and duration of past physical activity and by the specifi city of training. For instance, a crosssectional study demonstrated smaller H-refl ex sizes in ballet dancers than in nonathletic persons. This may be related to the frequent use of cocontraction of antagonistic ankle muscles to ensure stability when dancing The mechanisms underlying short-and long-term adaptations in the H-refl ex during motor skill learning are incompletely understood. Since changes in descending drive and in the spinal cord itself occur during the learning process, it is likely that the mechanisms involve changes at multiple sites. On one hand, modulation in descending drive may contribute to maintain a tight control of spinal circuits during acquisition of novel motor skill tasks as part of the sensorimotor integration process. Also changes in presynaptic inhibition of the synapses between sensory afferents and motoneurones are important in the adaptation of the refl ex circuitry during motor learning. Habituation of the monosynaptic gill-withdrawal refl ex in Aplysia is caused by a depression of synaptic transmission between the sensory afferents and motoneurones through changes in presynaptic inhibition Even though the role of spinal cord plasticity in motor learning remains largely unknown, accumulating evidence has demonstrated that spinal cord plasticity occurs in the course of motor learning and it contributes to skill acquisition. Plasticity in spinal cord circuits may be an important mechanism for establishing motor recovery after motor disorders including spinal cord injury.Four major pathways descend from the brain to the spinal cord to control muscles that move the skeleton. These pathways arise in the vestibular nuclei More that just an anatomical distinction, the medial and lateral systems have different principal functions. The medial system provides postural control (Box 30.1). Monkeys with medial system lesions fall over when they attempt to ambulate and climb, but when supported, they can use their hands and fi ngers adeptly in retrieving food pieces from narrow holes Early experimenters found that some degree of postural and refl ex control remains after higher brain centers are completely cut off from the brain stem and spinal cord, and that the extent of preserved motor function is determined by the level of the transection that disconnects the upper portions of the brain Transections at higher levels of the neuraxis leave part of the brain stem connected with the spinal cord. Chronic bulbospinal cats, those with medulla and spinal cord below the transection, show primitive attempts at righting themselves when placed on one side. Effective righting may be observed in chronically surviving animals subjected to transection that leaves the mesencephalon intact below the level of the cut. As the level of transection is raised, posture and balance become progressively closer to normal. The decorticateV. MOTOR SYSTEMS animal produced by the ablation of cerebral cortical tissue has many apparently normal postural reactions, lacking only certain placing and stepping reactions. Progressively higher brain transections enable more of the vestibular (balance) and proprioceptive (muscle and position sense) circuitry that participates in postural control, as well as improving the overall balance between excitatory and inhibitory infl uences on the spinal cord.Nuclei of the brain stem reticular formation with intact spinal projections after high brain stem transection include the locus ceruleus and raphe nuclei, the origins of descending noradrenergic and serotonergic neuromodulatory axonal projections that alter excitability of neurons in the spinal cord, as discussed in the preceding chapter. Parts of the raphe nuclei also have a role in circadian rhythms (Chapters 41 and 42), and projections of the locus ceruleus are involved in attention (Chapter 48) and internal reward (Chapter 43). Other areas of the reticular formation involved in motor control have specifi c functions in generation of the locomotor rhythm (MLR, mesencephalic locomotor region, Chapter 29) and rapid eye movements The sensory inputs most important for postural responses are vision, proprioception, and vestibular sense. Vestibular sensory signals from the labyrinth of the inner ear provide direct information about rotations of the head and its orientation with respect to gravity. Two types of vestibular transducer organssemicircular canals and otolithic maculae-are located within the labyrinth of the ear and respond to accelerations of the head in space. The three semicircular canals and the two otolithic maculae are stimulated by rotational and linear acceleration, respectively. The mechanical structure of the sense organ determines the nature of the effective stimulus The labyrinth ( V. MOTOR SYSTEMS refl exes they generate (Chapter 33), and are introduced here only briefl y here. A semicircular canal is excited by rotational accelerations, and the mechanical structure of the canal converts acceleration into a rotational velocity signal. The three canals in each labyrinth are oriented for excitation by rotations toward that side of the body, horizontally, diagonally forward, and diagonally backward for the horizontal, anterior, and posterior canals, respectively. Thus, each labyrinth is excited by head rotation toward its side, called ipsilateral rotation. Canal afferents fi re action potentials at a rate approximately proportional to the velocity of head rotation in the direction of the canal orientation. Both labyrinths are excited by purely forward or backward rotation, the anterior canals excited during the forward phase and the posterior canals excited during the backward phase.There are two otolith organs in mammals, the utricle (utriculus) and saccule (sacculus). The names apply to the fl uid chambers in which they lie, and the specifi c locations of the receptors are called the maculae. The two maculae are small regions that contain hair cells innervated by vestibular afferents. Like auditory and semicircular canal hair cells, bending of their cilia is the excitatory stimulus for macular hair cells, and the cilia are imbedded in a gelatinous mass above the cell bodies. Unlike canal hair cells, the otolithic hair cell maculae rest in large chambers, in which fl uid motion is thought to exert little or no force on the cilia. Instead, the gelatinous mass holding the cilia contains dense crystals, the otoconia or statoconia, and the entire mass above the hair cells of a macula is acted on by gravity or linear acceleration because of its higher density than the endolymph. The otoconial mass sags in the direction of a head tilt. This sagging, or the equivalent lagging of the mass behind a linear acceleration, provides the natural stimulus for otoliths.The utricular macula lies horizontally on the fl oor of its cavity. When the head is still and held approximately erect with respect to gravity, there is no stimulus to this organ, but tilts from the erect posture will excite utricular afferents. Microscopic examination of the utricular macula shows that the hair cells are not all oriented with their cilia arranged in the same direction, and different directions of tilt excite different populations of utricular afferents. The direction of the hair cell indicated by its structural orientation is called its morphological polarization vector and corresponds to the best direction of tilt for exciting the receptor. Each utricular macula has hair cell orientations capable of responding to any direction of head tilt, but ipsilateral tilt excites a predominant number of afferents. Thus, as for the semicircular canals, we say that ipsilaterally directed head motion is excitatory. The saccular macula is placed vertically on the side of the saccule, approximately in a parasagittal plane. There is a strong acceleration stimulus to the saccular macula when the head is erect and little or no stimulus when the head is lying on either side. The sacculus responds vigorously when the head bobs up and down, as during locomotion, but the exact functions of the sacculus are debated and are beyond the scope of this chapter. In summary, two types of vestibular signals are available to assist balance: ipsilaterally directed rotational head velocity is signaled by the semicircular canals and ipsilaterally directed head tilt or an equivalent linear acceleration is signaled by the utricular otoliths.Vestibulocervical (neck or collic refl exes) and vestibulospinal refl exes make use of canal and otolith signals to stabilize the posture of the head and body. These refl exes are thought to serve two functions, both as stabilizing, or "negative feedback" systems A related positional nystagmus experienced by many party-goers is positional alcohol nystagmus (PAN), which is similar to the condition where debris is stuck to the canal receptor surface. Rapid consumption of alcohol leads to decreased blood density, which makes the canal receptors less dense than the more slowly absorptive endolymph. When the intoxicated person lies down and turns the head to one side, the canal receptors fl oat up in the endolymph, as if pushed by a head rotation, and a vigorous nystagmus can occur. PAN is peripheral in origin, not among the central effects of the drug. This has been shown by having subjects drink deuterium water ("heavy water"), which makes the canal receptors sink in the endolymph and causes nystagmus in the opposite direction to PAN. V. MOTOR SYSTEMS being primary action at the cervical versus lumbar spinal levels.The neuroanatomical pathways that contribute to the vestibulocervical and other vestibulospinal refl ex responses ( Initial quantitative studies of the vestibulocervical refl ex used sinusoidally oscillating stimuli and concentrated on the timing of the refl ex head torques or the electromyographic activity that accompanied neck muscle contractions, just as response timing had been the focus in studies of vestibular primary afferents. The conclusion from these studies was that vestibulocervical refl ex circuitry in the vestibular nuclei introduces central neural processing with two important features. First, at low frequencies a portion of the velocity signal from the semicircular canals is converted to a head position signal, appropriate for repositioning the head in response to a slow change in head angle. Second, at high frequencies, vestibulocervical refl ex circuitry appears to introduce an anticipatory or "phase lead" response, which works in conjunction with the canal afferent signal to make very rapid responses so that the behavioral output of the refl ex opposes head angular acceleration, as would be appropriate if the inertia of the head were an important factor to be overcome for compensation during rapid head motion. The mechanisms by which neurons in the brain stem accomplish these functions are unknown.Timing of vestibulocervical responses is reasonable given the function of the refl ex and the mechanical properties of the load presented by the head. The mechanical properties of the multijoint system of the limbs and trunk are far more complex, and it is correspondingly more diffi cult to predict what the timing of the controlling neural signals should be. Electromyographic recordings during vestibulospinal refl exes in decerebrated animals have shown that limb extensors at low frequencies of oscillation are excited in phase with the position of the head. For example, when the head rolls slowly to the left, the left forelimb extends as if to brace against further displacement. The likely source of signals exciting these responses is the otolith organs. As the frequency of head oscillation increases, the timing of vestibulospinal responses corresponds more closely to head rotation velocity. The value of this timing is debatable, but the implication is that semicircular canal signals begin to predominate over otolith signals in vestibulospinal responses at higher frequencies.A major focus of work on both vestibulocervical and vestibulospinal refl exes is the spatial organization of the responses and the possible interaction of spatial properties and timing In the case of the vestibulocervical refl ex, there are many ways that the more than 30 muscles of the neck could be used to compensate for a particular direction of head rotation. What synergies or coordination of muscle groups does the brain use to generate compensatory vestibulocervical responses? The principles underlying the brain's pattern of coordinated activation of neck muscles to compensate for head rotation are unknown, although some features of spatial organization have been elucidated. Each of the major neck muscles exhibits a characteristic directionality of excitation in response to vestibular stimulation by rotation in many different directions, but that direction does not match the directional sensitivity of any single semicircular canal. Instead, the responses to rapid motions refl ect a weighted sum of canal inputs, and various proposals attempt to account for the particular weightings observed.A complicating feature of vestibulocervical spatial organization is the dependence in some cases of the timing of vestibulocervical neuron or neck muscle activation upon the direction of the vestibular stimulus. This dependence has been termed spatial-temporal convergence and may refl ect canal and otolith signal addition to match a varying mechanical load presented by the head for different directions of rotation. Another diffi culty in the analysis of vestibulocervical responses is the presence of signals related to the velocity of eye movement or the direction in which the eyes are pointed within their orbits. Add to this the visual and proprioceptive signals present in vestibulospinal neural circuitry, discussed in the following sections, and the overall picture is one of a rich and complex control system that we are only beginning to understand. Comparable information on the spatial organization of vestibulospinal control of the limbs has begun to reveal a similar complexity.The proprioceptive contribution to refl ex stabilization of the head and body has been examined in many of the same ways as vestibular contributions . The sensory situation for proprioceptive signals is more complicated than for vestibular signals, as any of the muscles of the neck, trunk, or limbs could provide an input to infl uence any other muscle or synergistic group of muscles. Only the signals from neck proprioception that activate neck muscles (i.e., the neck stretch refl ex or cervicocervical refl ex, also called the cervicocollic refl ex) have been studied extensively. Like the stretch refl ex for limb extensors, the cervicocervical refl ex opposes lengthening of the muscles concerned and so is a negative feedback compensatory system. Other proprioceptive systems often are considered postural reactions rather than simple refl exes and are described in turn.The cervicocervical refl ex in alert animals is not consistent, so the refl ex has been analyzed by rotating the trunk of decerebrated cats while holding the head fi xed in space. This stimulates neck proprioceptors without any vestibular input. The results are reminiscent of the vestibulocervical refl ex. At low frequencies of neck rotation cervicocervical refl ex muscle contractions correspond to the extent of muscle stretch, but at higher frequencies the responses occur more rapidly, corresponding to the velocity or acceleration of muscle stretch. The directionality of neck muscle responses to stretch matches that of vestibulocervical responses fairly well. Common directionality implies that signals for vestibular and stretch refl exes to neck muscles share some central circuitry. Not only does this directionality not match that of any single semicircular canal, it also does not appear to match the direction of pulling actions of the neck muscles under study. We are left to speculate on the principles of central organization of these refl exes. The central pathways mediating the cervicocervical refl ex are more varied still, and less well mapped, than those for vestibulocervical refl ex responses. There are homonymous monosynaptic stretch refl ex connections, heteronymous connections to a muscle from other muscles, and longer pathways that may involve connections through medial, lateral, and descending vestibular nuclei as well as reticulospinal neurons.A variety of refl exes contribute to the maintenance of overall body posture. All benefi t from the integrity of connections with the brain stem, and in some cases higher centers, but not all are characterized as readily by objective measures as the vestibulocervical, vestibulospinal, and cervicocervical refl exes already discussed. The tonic neck or cervicospinal refl exes are the best known of these, but the supporting reactions, placing reactions, righting reactions, hopping or stepping reactions, and others are useful parts of the neural control of posture. The tonic neck refl ex adjusts the extension of the limbs in response to the angle of the head on the trunk. Stable posture requires that the feet be not only rigid but placed correctly on a supporting surface, and the placing reactions of quadrupeds contribute to this by moving the feet toward a visible surface (visual placing reaction) or onto a surface that has tactile contact with the top of the foot, chin, or whiskers (tactile placing reactions). Although a tactile placing reaction may be evoked in primitive form in a spinalized animal, it is generally held that at least the lower brain stem must be intact for tactile placing to occur in an effective form. Finally, if balance reactions are insuffi cient to maintain stable posture, as when the support surface is moved beneath the foot, the limb may hop to a new position where stable posture is possible (hopping reaction).The action of the righting refl ex of cats during falling is familiar to all. Humans show a similar reaction to an unexpected drop, measurable as a short latency electromyographic response in the gastrocnemius muscle. In cats, this response survives blockage of the semicircular canals, but not total labyrinthectomy, and THE MEDIAL POSTURAL SYSTEM 706 30. DESCENDING CONTROL OF MOVEMENT V. MOTOR SYSTEMS so appears to be otolith mediated. The action of these many postural reactions in the context of maintenance of posture and balance in intact humans has been the focus of several studies utilizing movable posture platforms.How then do these descending pathways from the brain stem coordinate to produce the postural behaviors of intact animals? The basic problem of standing posture is keeping the center of mass of the body, also called center of gravity, positioned over the base of support provided by the feet so that the body does not topple. The ranges of body positions that rest over the base of support defi ne the limits of stability. When the extremes of body sway extend beyond those limits, the body must reduce them, take a step, or fall. An important tool for exploring body stability is the posture platform, a base on which subjects can stand and be subjected to displacements of the underlying supporting surface. The posture platform is used with body position sensors and electromyography to evaluate standing posture Sudden displacement of the platform on which a subject stands allows measurement of the latencies and patterns of electromyographic activity in the postural muscles of the legs. When the subject is standing on a large platform that is displaced forward or backward, the leg muscles contract in sequence from ankle to thigh to hip, and motion occurs primarily about the ankle joint. When the platform displacement is forward, the ankle fl exor tibialis anterior on the front of the calf is fi rst to be excited (fl exion is the toe-up direction), at about 80-100 ms after the displacement. This is followed about 20 ms later by contraction of the quadriceps thigh muscles and then later still by contraction of trunk musculature. Backward displacement fi rst elicits excitation of the gactrocnemius muscle at the back of the calf to extend the ankle, followed by excitation of thigh and trunk muscles antagonistic to those excited by forward displacement Like simple refl exes, these postural reactions represent neurally mediated negative feedback responses. However, postural reactions differ from ordinary refl ex responses in the degree of their dependence on context and recent experience. It also appears that the postural strategies are not mutually exclusive, but are more like additive units or building blocks. When Horak and Nashner placed subjects on support surfaces intermediate in length between the long surfaces associated with ankle strategy and the short surfaces associated with hip strategy, they found that subjects adopted complex strategies that they believed represented combinations of ankle and hip strategies with different magnitudes and temporal relations. In addition, they found that during the fi rst few trials after switching from one length of support surface to another, the subjects' responses in part refl ected the previous surface, only gradually shifting from one strategy to another over several trials.The range of postural reactions recorded from standing human subjects argues for a complexity beyond that observed in the vestibulocervical or vestibulospinal refl exes studied during rotation or tilting of animal subjects, but it is not yet clear whether this complexity refl ects the rich variety of strategies that can achieve the single goal of balance or whether there are strong constraints on postural responses that arise from the complicated biomechanics of the multijoint system of the body. Balance is subject not only to the static requirement for location of the center of mass over the support provided by the feet, but also to dynamic factors that accompany the rapid movement of massive body parts. Inertia, viscosity, and elasticity act at each of the major joints, and the task of measuring or modeling these factors and their interactions has barely begun.Experimental animals can also be placed on posture platforms, which in the case of quadrupeds can consist of four small pads for the limbs Control of posture involves many levels within the nervous system, and it is not surprising that disorders of posture can result from damage to the sensory periphery or to telencephalic, cerebellar, brain stem, or spinal centers. The striking motor consequences of lesions of the basal ganglia may include profound effects on posture, such as the rigidity and general poverty of movement associated with Parkinson's disease (Chapter 31). Damage to the anterior vermis of the cerebellum can exaggerate decerebrate rigidity, and cerebellar patients show poorer performance in posture platform situations, with less adaptive modifi cation of responses, as might be expected from our knowledge of cerebellar function (Chapter 32).Many of the more plainly visible postural disorders stem from damage to the vestibular system. Diseases of the vestibular system that affect posture (and generally also cause dizziness) include vestibular neuritis, peripheral or central tumors or infarction, and Meniere's syndrome The typical patient with Meniere syndrome develops a sensation of fullness and pressure along with decreased hearing and tinnitus in one ear. Vertigo follows rapidly, reaching a maximum intensity within minutes and then slowly subsiding over several hours. Often the patient is left with a sense of unsteadiness and nonspecifi c dizziness that can go on for days after the acute vertiginous spell. In the early stages, hearing loss is completely reversible, but as the disease progresses, residual hearing loss becomes a prominent feature. The tinnitus typically is described as a roaring sound similar to the sound of the ocean. These episodes occur at irregular intervals over years, with periods of remission unpredictably intermixed. Eventually, most patients reach the so-called "burnt out phase," where the episodic vertigo disappears and severe permanent hearing loss remains.The clinical syndrome was fi rst described by Prosper Meniere in 1861, but Hallpike and Cairns made the initial clinical-pathological correlation with hydrops of the labyrinth in 1938. Patients with Meniere syndrome invariably show an increase in volume of endolymph associated with distention of the entire endolymphatic system. Herniations and ruptures in the membranous labyrinth commonly occur, which may explain the episodes of hearing loss and vertigo.Delayed endolymphatic hydrops occurs in an ear that has been damaged years before, usually by infection. With this disorder, the patient reports a long history of hearing loss, typically since childhood, followed many years later by episodic vertigo but without the typical auditory symptoms. The pathologic fi ndings are remarkably similar to idiopathic Meniere syndrome, suggesting a common etiology. A subclinical viral infection could damage the resorptive mechanism of the inner ear, leading to an eventual decompensation in the balance between secretion and resorption of endolymph.The key to the diagnosis of Meniere syndrome is to document fl uctuating hearing levels in a patient with the characteristic clinical history. In the early stages, the sensorineural hearing loss is usually greater in the low frequencies. Some patients with Meniere syndrome develop abrupt episodes of falling to the ground without loss of consciousness or associated neurologic symptoms. These episodes have been called "otolithic catastrophes" because they are thought to result from a sudden mechanical deformation of the otolith receptor organ. Patients often report feeling as though they were pushed to the ground by some external force.Because the cause of Meniere syndrome is usually unknown, treatment is empiric. Medical management consists of symptomatic treatment with antivertiginous drugs and long-term prophylaxis with salt restriction and diuretics. Many different surgical procedures have been tried but none has been consistently effective. Shunt operations to decrease the endolymph pressure have not been successful because the implanted drain devices are encapsulated rapidly by fi brous tissue. Destructive surgeries (removing the labyrinth or cutting the vestibular nerve) can stop the episodes of vertigo but do not change the tinnitus and progressive hearing loss. V. MOTOR SYSTEMS either experimentally in animals or as the result of disease or surgical intervention against disease in humans. The postural symptoms immediately following loss of vestibular input to one side of the brain vary across species, with nonmammalian and "lower" mammalian species typically showing a more prominent tilting of the head and body toward the side of damage. Vestibular afferents have a high level of resting activity, and leaning toward the side of lost vestibular signals makes sense in that the spontaneous or resting activity of the remaining vestibular apparatus is signaling, in effect, motion toward the intact side because it is not balanced by equal resting activity from the damaged side. To counter this neural stimulus, the affected individual tilts away from the directions of apparent motion. This static postural effect of unilateral labyrinthectomy is accompanied by dynamic postural defi cits, seen in experimental animals as weakened ipsilateral limb extensor responses and delayed responses to sudden drops. Compensation for unilateral labyrinthectomy occurs over a period of a few weeks, during which there is considerable recovery.Patients with long-standing bilateral loss may perform well on posture platforms when visual and somatosensory cues are present, but fail completely to maintain upright stance when the support surface and visual surround both sway with the patient so that only vestibular information is accurate. Patients with recent bilateral vestibular loss or who have not yet compensated for vestibular loss also do poorly when vision and support surface are unreliable, but these patients perform poorly if only one sense, be it vision or somatic sense, is made an unreliable indicator of balance.Axons from vestibular and reticular nuclei in the brain stem descend in pathways located ventromedially in the spinal cord to provide postural tone and balance. Balance is maintained by negative feedback refl exes that are stimulated by the vestibular canals and otoliths. The vestibulocervical refl ex excites neck muscles via the medial vestibulospinal tract to oppose head tilt, and vestibulospinal refl exes carried by the lateral vestibulospinal tract excite ipsilateral limb extensors to oppose body tilt. Vestibular, muscle stretch, and other refl exes work together to coordinate posture and balance, and the medial system adopts  The medial system thus provides underlying postural control for stance, ambulation, and orientation of the head; the lateral system superimposes the ability to make more sophisticated, voluntary movements in response to complex features of the external environment (perceived through the senses) and internal state (stored memories, knowledge, and emotion). Much of this control is mediated by specialized regions of the cerebral cortex. Outfl ow from this motor cortex dominates the lateral descending system, particularly in primates and humans.The Corticospinal Projection Is the Most Direct Pathway from the Cerebral Cortex to Spinal Motor Neurons For more than a century, electrical stimulation of a limited portion of the frontal lobe of the cerebral cortex has been known to evoke movements. Electrical stimulation of this "excitable cortex" evokes movements readily because this region has relatively direct connections to spinal motor neurons. In primates with a central sulcus (Rolandic fi ssure) in the neocortex, cortical neurons with axons projecting to the spinal cord are found most densely in the anterior bank of the central sulcus. The density of such neurons decreases from there rostrally to the precentral sulcus (posterior bank of the arcuate sulcus in macaque monkeys) and medially to the cingulate sulcus ( The axons of neurons that project from the cerebral cortex to the spinal cord constitute the corticospinal tract. Corticospinal neurons have large pyramidshaped somata in cortical layer Vb. Their axons leave the cortex, pass through the centrum semiovale, and enter the internal capsule, along with many other axons from other cortical areas. The corticospinal axons are concentrated most heavily in the middle third of the posterior limb of the internal capsule. As axons descend from the internal capsule below the thalamus, they come to lie on the ventral surface of the brain stem. Here, they form the cerebral peduncle of the midbrain, where the corticospinal axons are concentrated in the middle third. The axons of the peduncle become intermixed with pontine nuclear neurons in the base of the pons (basis pontis). Most of these axons synapse on pontine neurons and end here, providing input from the cerebral cortex to the cerebellum. The continuing corticospinal axons collect to form the medullary pyramid (Box 30.4). As the medulla blends into the spinal cord, the vast majority of corticospinal axons cross the midline and enter the lateral column of white matter on the opposite side of the spinal cord. Because of this decussation of the pyramidal tract, the left motor cortex controls movements on the right side of the body and vice versa. A small minority of corticospinal axons remain uncrossed and continue caudally as the ventral (or anterior) corticospinal tract near the ventral midline of the spinal cord.As descending corticospinal axons reach their target levels in the spinal cord, they enter the spinal gray matter, where they ramify and synapse. Whereas the majority of corticospinal axons synapse on premotor interneurons in the intermediate zone (Rexed's laminae VII and VIII), a minority of these axons synapse directly on motor neurons in Rexed's lamina IX. The somata of most corticospinal neurons that make such monosynaptic connections to motor neurons lie posteriorly in area 4, and their monosynaptic connections are made on the motor neurons of distal limb muscles, whose somata are clustered in the dorsolateral ventral horn. Corticospinal axons from neurons located more anteriorly typically synapse in the ventromedial portion of the ventral horn, where the motor neurons of proximal limb muscles and axial muscles are located. Some corticospinal axons cross the midline spinal gray matter to reach the ventromedial ventral horn ipsilateral to their origin; such doubly decussating corticospinal axons, along with the uncrossed ventral corticospinal tract, may be partly responsible for the relative preservation of trunk and proximal limb movements after unilateral damage to the cortex.The corticospinal tract is not the only output pathway through which the cerebral cortex contributes to motor control Inspection of cross-sections through the ventral surface of the medulla reveals a structure that looks like a small pyramid. This medullary pyramid turns out to be the collected bundle of corticospinal axons. The corticospinal tract therefore often is referred to as the pyramidal tract.Axons of noncorticospinal descending pathways do not pass through the medullary pyramid and therefore can be described collectively as extrapyramidal pathways. At one time these pathways were thought to receive their major controlling inputs from the basal ganglia. Human neurologic disorders that result from dysfunction of the basal ganglia thus came to be known as "extrapyramidal syndromes." This term is misleading, however. More recent work has shown that many of the brain stem nuclei giving rise to extrapyramidal pathways receive cortical input and that much of the output of the basal ganglia is directed via the thalamus back to cortical motor areas. Many manifestations of extrapyramidal syndromes may therefore be played out through cortical motor areas, even via the pyramidal tract. Indeed, surgical lesions of the pyramidal tract once were used to ameliorate some extrapyramidal syndromes. other, indirect pathways in the macaque has been demonstrated by cutting the medullary pyramid on one side. Stimulation of the cortex on that side still evoked contralateral movements. The somatotopic organization of the cortex in the operated animals was similar to that in normal macaques, although the thresholds for stimulation were raised and distal movements were evoked less often.Intermixed with corticospinal neurons in layer V of areas 4 and 6 are corticorubral neurons, whose axons project to the red nucleus (RN). Some corticospinal axons also send collaterals to the RN. In addition to cortical inputs, the RN also receives considerable input from the cerebellum (Chapter 32). Many RN neurons, particularly those in the caudal, magno-cellular portion, in turn send their axons across the midline and into the lateral column of the spinal cord, terminating most heavily in the dorsolateral region of the ventral horn. These descending axons from the RN constitute the rubrospinal tract. An indirect pathway thus exists from the cortex to the RN to the spinal cord. Although the rubrospinal tract is less prominent in humans than in nonhuman primates and carnivores, the activity of rubrospinal neurons indicates that they also play a signifi cant role during voluntary movements of the arm, hand, and fi ngers. The rubrospinal pathway thus works synergistically with the corticospinal pathway in controlling limb movements.A second indirect pathway involves neurons scattered in the medial reticular formation of the pons and medulla. The medial reticular formation receives input from cortical motor areas and projects via the ventral column of the spinal cord to the ventral horn, chiefl y its ventromedial portion. The axons that make this projection constitute the reticulospinal tract. Although the reticulospinal tract is also part of the medial descending system, the activity of some reticular formation neurons indicates that they also participate in controlling reaching movements.The original "motor cortex" is now appreciated to be comprised of several cortical areas. These areas are considered "motor" because (1) they project to other motor structures, (2) their ablation causes defi cits in movement, and (3) their stimulation evokes or alters movements.In addition to its descending projections to spinal motor neurons, the motor cortex has cytoarchitectonic features that distinguish it from other regions of the cerebral cortex. The somata of many pyramidal neurons in layer V, the output layer, are exceptionally large (Betz cells). In addition, the neurons of layer IV, the granular layer that receives thalamic input, are very sparse compared to other areas of the neocortex, and hence the motor cortex has been described as dysgranular (area 6) or agranular (area 4) cortex. Based on cytoarchitectonics, myeloarchitectonics, and histochemical features, the motor cortex of macaque monkeys can be subdivided into the cortical motor areas shown in Cortical motor areas differ in their connections with the thalamus. M1, PMv, and SMA, for example, connect primarily with VPLo/VLc, area X, and VLo in the thalamus, respectively. These differences are significant because thalamic nuclei VPLo/VLc and area X receive major inputs from the cerebellum, whereas VLo receives major input from the basal ganglia. Thus, information processed by the cerebellum is directed largely to M1 and PMv, whereas information from the basal ganglia is sent largely to SMA.Cortical motor areas also differ in their connections with one another and with other regions of the cortex Different cortical motor areas also receive input from different cortical sensory and association areas: M1 receives input from the primary somatosensory area (S1), PMv receives input from visual association area 7b, and PMd receives input from somatosensory association area 5. Because of these inputs, many motor cortex neurons have somatosensory receptive fi elds. Neurons located caudally in M1 tend to respond to Modifi ed from PMv receives both somatosensory and visual input via area 7b. Both the somatosensory and the visual receptive fi elds of PMv neurons tend to be large, and when single PMv neurons receive both types of sensory information, the fi elds tend to be related The organization of the primary motor cortex, M1, has been studied more extensively than that of other cortical motor areas. Within the M1 of primates, the face is represented laterally, the lower extremity (or hindlimb and tail) medially, and the upper extremity (or forelimb) in between Moreover, distal parts of the extremities and acral parts of the face (lips and tongue) are most heavily represented caudally, whereas proximal parts of the extremities and axial movements are most heavily represented rostrally. Those parts of the body that are used for fi ne manipulative movements (such as lips, tongue, and fi ngers in primates) are generally represented over a wider cortical territory than body parts used in gross movements such as ambulation. Penfi eld, in his cartoon of the motor homunculus (little man), and Woolsey, in his cartoon of the motor simiusculus (little monkey), conveyed this apparent magnifi cation of certain body parts with respect to cortical territory by distorting the size of body parts relative to their normal proportions.The somatotopic organization of M1 is not, however, a one-to-one mapping of body parts, muscles, or movements. Within the arm representation, for example, the   V. MOTOR SYSTEMS cortical territory representing any particular part of the arm overlaps considerably with the territory representing nearby parts. This overlap results from three features of M1's organization: convergence, divergence, and horizontal interconnection.M1 outputs arising from a wide cortical territory converge on the spinal motor neuron pool of single muscles. Convergence of M1 outputs has been shown by delivering intracortical microstimulation while observing the body for evoked movements and/or recording electromyographic (EMG) activity from multiple muscles. Maps of which body parts move or which muscles contract upon threshold stimulation at different cortical sites look like a complex mosaic A second factor contributing to the overlap of territories in M1 is the divergence of output from single cortical neurons to multiple motor neuron pools. Intracellular staining has shown that a single corticospinal axon may have terminal ramifi cations within the motor neuron pools of multiple muscles over several segmental levels of the spinal cord ( A third factor contributing to overlapping representation is the horizontal interconnectivity intrinsic to M1. Although most horizontal axon collaterals of neurons in layer V extend only 1-2 mm, some extend across the upper extremity representation, interconnecting even the territories of proximal and distal muscles.Because of convergence, divergence, and horizontal interconnections, neuronal activity is widely distributed in M1 during natural movements, even discrete movements of single body parts. In monkeys trained to perform individuated movements of each fi nger, single M1 neurons are active during movements of multiple fi ngers, and neurons throughout the M1 hand area are active during movements of any given fi nger.Likewise, in humans performing movements of different fi ngers, activity is distributed over the entire M1 hand representation whether the subject is moving a single fi nger or the whole hand. Although the entire hand representation may be activated for movement of any given fi nger, monkey and human studies have shown a tendency for the center of activation during movements of the thumb to be located laterally to that for movements of other fi ngers, consistent with the somatotopic orientation of the hand in the classic simiusculus and homunculus. (A) Isothreshold contours show the points at which EMG responses were evoked in three different muscles-extensor digitorum communis (EDC), thenar, and fi rst dorsal interosseus-by intracortical microstimulation in the anterior bank of the central sulcus. (B) Data shown in A indicate that the cortical input to the motor neurons of any muscle originates from a wide territory in M1 and that the cortical territory providing input to a given muscle overlaps extensively with the cortical territory providing input to other muscles in the same part of the body. Modifi ed from The somatotopic representation in M1, like that in the primary somatosensory cortex, has a certain degree of plasticity. The cortical territory representing a given muscle can enlarge when nearby body parts are denervated experimentally. Threshold stimulation in the cortical territory that had represented a denervated body part then comes to evoke movements in nearby body parts. Enlargement of a given muscle's cortical territory occurs as well when that muscle is stretched passively or used intensely for a prolonged period. Furthermore, in normal humans who are actively practicing a complex sequence of fi nger movements, the cortical territory representing a given fi nger muscle enlarges as the subjects become skilled at performing the sequence. Because such changes can occur within several minutes, they probably are mediated by longterm potentiation and/or depression at existing synapses. This ability of the M1 cortex to reorganize may in part underlie motor recovery seen in humans after damage to M1 or the corticospinal tract.Several methods have enabled investigators to explore how cortical motor areas contribute to the production and control of voluntary movement in awake, behaving subjects. Whereas microelectrodes record the action potentials of single neurons, measurements made by functional imaging or by recording surface potentials refl ect the net activity of thousands of cortical neurons and millions of synapses.These different methodologies now make it clear that many cortical areas in addition to the primary motor cortex are active during the planning and execution of voluntary movements.  In one of the earliest studies of single neuron activity in awake behaving animals, Evarts recorded the activity of M1 pyramidal tract neurons in monkeys trained to raise and lower weights using fl exion and extension wrist movements Evarts went on to demonstrate that the discharge frequency of M1 pyramidal tract neurons (PTNs) varied in relation to a number of mechanical parameters of the movement the monkey was making. By changing the weights the monkey had to lift, Evarts showed that PTN discharge frequency varied with the force the monkey exerted. Comparison of PTN discharge with simultaneous force recordings revealed that bursts of PTN fi ring were correlated with sudden increases in the exerted force, indicating a relationship between fi ring frequency and the rate of change of force. Subsequent studies have confi rmed these fi ndings and have also shown that the discharge of M1 neurons can be related to the direction of movement, the position of a particular joint, or the velocity of movement. Cortical neurons whose fi ring is related to kinematic and dynamic parameters of movement are not found only in M1. Many neurons in the SMA, PMd, and parietal area 5 (which projects to SMA and PMd) fi re in relation to movement direction, and some PMv neurons fi re in relation to movement force. Therefore, neurons in several nonprimary cortical motor areas participate with those in M1 to control movement parameters such as direction, force, position, and velocity.Although very strong correlations can be found between the discharge frequency of a given neuron Technological advances now enable our knowledge of neuronal activity during voluntary movements to be applied in creating useful brain-machine interfaces. The activity of dozens of neurons can be recorded simultaneously from electrode arrays implanted in the primary motor cortex, premotor cortex, and/or parietal cortex. The spike discharges of these neuron populations, passed into computers, can be decoded in real time to obtain specifi c information about the direction and speed of voluntary movements the subject intends to make. This decoded information then can be used online to control a cursor on a computer monitor, or even a robotic arm. For patients with an amputated extremity or a spinal cord lesion, such brain-machine interfaces eventually may drive neuroprosthetic devices that can be used independently by the patient, replacing the function of missing or paralyzed arms and hands for many activities of daily living. V. MOTOR SYSTEMS Conversely, any given parameter or other feature of a movement is represented not by the discharge of a single M1 neuron, but by the ensemble activity of a large population of cortical neurons. Although a single M1 neuron typically discharges during reaching movements in several directions, for example, when the activity of many M1 neurons is combined appropriately, the population of M1 neurons can be shown to represent movement direction precisely Cortical areas outside the primary motor cortex seem to be especially concerned with using a wide variety of sensory and other information as "cues" to select and guide movements. Insight into these cortical processes has been obtained by separating in time a cue instructing which movement to make from a second cue to execute the instructed movement. This creates a period between the two cues during which the subject knows what movement to make, but is not making the movement per se. During such an instructed delay period, many neurons in M1, SMA, and PMd discharge at their highest rate while the subject waits to move in a particular direction The direction instructed usually is the same as the direction of the actual movement. To pick up a pencil, for example, you look at the pencil and then move your hand to the same place. Somehow your brain transforms the visual location of the pencil into the location to which your hand is moved. Insight into how cue direction is transformed into movement direction has come from tasks in which these two features were experimentally dissociated, as if you looked at a pencil in a mirror and then reached to pick up the real Mirror neurons are a distinct class of neurons, originally discovered in a sector of the ventral premotor cortex (area F5) of the monkey, that discharge both when the monkey executes a given motor act (e.g., grasping an object) and when it observes another individual (a human being or another monkey) performing the same or a similar motor act. Mirror neurons do not discharge in response to the simple presentation of food or other interesting objects. They also do not discharge, or discharge much less, when the monkey observes hand actions mimed without the target object. Thus, the effective visual stimulus for monkey mirror neurons is the observation of an effector (hand or mouth) interacting with an object.All mirror neurons have motor properties and, as other neurons located in area F5, discharge in relation to the goal of the motor act, such as grasping an object, rather than to the movements that form it (e.g., individual fi nger movements). On the basis of their motor properties mirror neurons can be subdivided into various classes. Among them the most common are grasping, manipulating, tearing, and holding neurons.Mirror neurons are present not only in the premotor area F5, but have also been found in the inferior parietal lobule (IPL). This region receives input from the cortex of the superior temporal sulcus (STS) and sends output to ventral premotor cortex, including area F5. STS neurons are known to respond to the observation of actions done by others, but they are not endowed with motor properties. Thus, the cortical mirror neuron system is formed by two main sectors: the ventral premotor cortex and the inferior parietal lobule.A large amount of evidence indicates that a mirror neuron system also exists in humans. Evidence in this sense comes from neurophysiological (EEG, MEG and TMS) and brain-imaging experiments (PET, fMRI). The neurophysiological experiments showed that the mere observation of others' actions induces an increase of excitability of the motor cortex. This excitability increase manifests itself in a desynchronization of EEG rhythms recorded from the motor cortex (the "mu" rhythm in particular) similar, although of less intensity, to that observed during active movements. The TMS experiments confi rmed these fi ndings. They showed that, during the observation of actions done by others, there is a specifi c increase of motor evoked potentials in the muscles of the observer that corresponds to those used by the action's agent.The neurophysiological techniques have been instrumental in demonstrating that a mirror neuron system exists in humans. They could not show, however, its extent and precise localization. This gap has been fi lled by brain imaging experiments (PET and fMRI). These experiments showed that the observation of objectdirected actions activate two cortical sectors that are also active during action execution: the inferior parietal lobule and a caudal sector of the frontal lobe. There is therefore a good correspondence between the localization of mirror neuron system in humans and monkeys.With brain imaging techniques it has been possible to demonstrate that the human mirror neuron system have a somatotopic, albeit rough, organization. In the frontal lobe, mouth movements are located ventrally in the posterior part of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), the hand movement are located more dorsally, partly in IFG and partly in the ventral premotor cortex, and leg movements even more dorsally, in dorsalmost part of the ventral premotor cortex. In the parietal lobe the observation of mouth actions determines activation in the rostral part of the inferior parietal lobule, that of hand/arm actions activates a more caudal region corresponding to area PFG, while that of foot actions produces a signal increase more caudally and dorsally.Another important results of brain imaging studies was the demonstration that the presentation of emotional stimuli such as disgust or pain elicits, in the observer, the activations, of the same cortical regions that become active when the individual feels the same emotions. The cortical regions forming this "emotional mirror neuron system" are the anterior insula and the rostral cingulate cortex.What is the functional role of the mirror neurons? A series of hypotheses have been formulated. Among them are action understanding, imitation, intention understanding, and empathy. The question, however, of which is the functional role of mirror neurons is an ill posed question. Mirror neurons do not have a unique function. Their properties indicate that they represent a mechanism that maps the pictorial description of actions carried out by others onto their motor counterpart. Their functional role depends, fi rst of all, on where this mapping occurs.This becomes very clear if one compares the activity of the traditional parieto-frontal mirror neuron circuit with that of the insula and anterior cingulate cortex. The BOX 30.6THE LATERAL VOLUNTARY SYSTEM V. MOTOR SYSTEMS activation of parieto-premotor circuit elicits the motor representation of the observed action. In this way it gives a fi rst person representation of what the others are doing. In contrast, the activation of the insula and cingulate, elicits the viscero-motor representation of the observed emotion. In this way, it gives the fi rst person representation of what the others are feeling.The functional role of mirror neurons is not limited to the recognition of motor acts and emotions. Recent experiments showed that the parieto-premotor circuit, besides the recognition of the "what" of a motor act (e.g., grasping an object), is also involved in understanding the "why" this motor act is done (e.g., grasping for placing or for eating, etc.), that the agent's intentions. The mechanism underlying this capacity is related to action organization of the parietal and premotor cortices, where successive motor acts are specifi cally linked in goal-directed action chains. These chains are activated not only during action execution, but also during motor act observation, thus allowing the individual, if relevant clues are available, to "play" internally the not-yet performed series of motor acts of the agent and to understand in this way his or her intention.Finally, there is evidence that the mirror neuron system plays a crucial role both in imitation and imitation learning. As far as imitation is concerned, the capacity to repeat a simple motor act (e.g., fi nger lifting) relies on a direct translation of the observed act in the relative motor representation. For imitation learning, the situation is more complex and requires both the mirror neuron system, which codes the observed motor acts, and additional structures that reorganize these acts in new patterns or sequences.pencil instead of the mirror image. To dissociate cue direction and movement direction experimentally, researchers have trained monkeys to perform mental rotation tasks in which a cue at one location instructs a movement to a different location.Investigators have used such tasks to study neurons in the area principalis of the dorsolateral frontal lobe, in PMd, in SMA, and in M1. In each of these cortical areas, the activity of some neurons correlates best with the direction of the instructional cue, whereas the activity of other neurons correlates best with the direction of the actual movement. In general, from the area principalis, through the PMd and SMA to M1, the percentage of cue-related neurons decreases and the percentage of movement-related neurons increases. Moreover, as time progresses from the appearance of the instructional cue to the execution of the movement, the discharge of the neuronal populations encode cue direction initially and movement direction subsequently. The transformation of cue direction into movement direction thus involves many cortical motor areas and progresses throughout the reaction time of the subject.Another aspect of movement preparation that differentially involves certain cortical motor areas has to do with whether the instructions about what to do come from internally remembered or externally delivered cues. In one experiment, for example, monkeys were trained to touch three of four pads in randomly selected sequences that were cued when the pads were lit in sequence. Once a monkey was accustomed to a given sequence, the lights gradually were dimmed until the monkey was performing the correct sequence based only on internally remembered cues. After several of these remembered trials, the pads were lit in a different sequence for several trials. Whereas neurons in M1 showed similar discharge rates during the internally remembered and externally cued trials for a given sequence, SMA neurons were generally more active during the internally remembered trials, and PMv neurons were generally more active during the externally cued trials Axons from the cerebral cortex and from the red nucleus in the brain stem descend in pathways located dorsolaterally in the spinal cord to control voluntary movements. In addition to corticospinal and rubrospinal pathways, the motor cortex also sends projections to the red nucleus and to the pontomedullary reticular formation, providing indirect pathways for voluntary control. Multiple cortical motor areas-distinguished by their inputs, their cytoarchitecture, and their interconnections with other cortical areas and with the thalamus-make different contributions to the control of voluntary movements. The most detailed motor map is found in the primary motor cortex, M1, but the somatotopic organization is limited by convergence and divergence in the corticospinal projection. Populations of M1 neurons are also in most direct control of movement kinematics and dynamics. Other cortical motor areas participate differentially in the selection of, and preparation for, voluntary movements based on a variety of internal and external cues.The motor cortex, the red nucleus, the pontomedullary reticular formation, and the vestibular nuclei each send major axonal projections descending from the brain to the spinal cord to control bodily movements.Although these pathways normally provide seamless movement control, different contributions of the medial and lateral descending pathways have been identifi ed experimentally.The medial system-vestibulospinal and reticulospinal-receives sensory input from the vestibular apparatus and mediates postural responses that keep the head and body stabilized for stance and gait. Additional visual and proprioceptive inputs that reach the vestibular and reticular nuclei via brain stem pathways or after processing in the cerebellum (Chapter 32) also infl uence postural control. Context-dependent strategies established via centers including the cerebellum and motor cortex further adapt postural responses to the needs of particular complex situations.The lateral system-corticospinal and rubrospinal-receives, in addition to somatosensory inputs, information processed by the cerebellum (Chapter 32), the basal ganglia (Chapter 31), and associated cortical areas to mediate voluntary movements of the face and extremities. Different cortical motor areas receive different portions of these inputs and therefore make different contributions to controlling voluntary movements. The most elaborate somatotopic representation is found in the primary motor cortex, M1. While the convergence, divergence, and horizontal interconnections of the intrinsic organization of M1 result in considerably distributed activation during voluntary movements, the same substrates enable substantial plasticity. Whereas M1 neurons most directly control the kinematics and dynamics of movement execution,PM SMA 400 ms FIGURE 30.15 Activity of three neurons-one in M1, one in PM, and one in SMA-recorded as a monkey pressed three buttons in sequence.The sequence was fi rst cued visually by lighting the buttons and was then cued internally. The M1 neuron showed similar activity whether the monkey performed from visual or internal cues. The PM neuron, however, was much more active in response to visual than internal cues, whereas the opposite was true for the SMA neuron. Modifi ed from other cortical motor areas participate in selecting which movement(s) to make on the basis of external cues and internal states.The basal ganglia are large subcortical structures comprising several interconnected nuclei in the forebrain, midbrain, and diencephalon ( The basal ganglia receive a broad spectrum of cortical inputs. The information conveyed to the basal ganglia then is processed by the basal ganglia circuitry to produce a more focused output to areas of the frontal lobes and brain stem that are involved in the planning and production of movement. The basal ganglia output is entirely inhibitory. Thus, an increase in basal ganglia output leads to a reduction in the activity of its targets. The fact that the basal ganglia output is inhibitory to thalmocortical and brainstem targets is important to understanding its normal motor function.At fi rst glance, the anatomy of the basal ganglia may seem confusing. There are several component nuclei at different levels in the brain, and two of the nuclei (substantia nigra (SN) and globus pallidus (GP)) are divided into functionally different components. The names of some structures are different in primates than in other mammals. Furthermore, the terminology has changed over the years so that an individual structure may be known by more than one name. However, with consistent use of modern terminology and a functional context in which to place the anatomy, the organization of basal ganglia can be learned readily. Moreover, once the circuitry is learned, many aspects of its normal function and of the response to injury become much easier to understand.The basal ganglia include the striatum (caudate, putamen, nucleus accumbens), the subthalamic nucleus (STN), the globus pallidus (internal segment or GPi; external segment or GPe; and ventral pallidum), and the substantia nigra (pars compacta or SNpc and pars reticulata or SNpr) ( The striatum is located in the forebrain and comprises the caudate nucleus and putamen (neostriatum) and nucleus accumbens (ventral striatum). This section focuses on the neostriatum (see Box 31.3 and Chapter 43 for a discussion of the ventral system of the basal ganglia). Embryologically, the striatum develops from a basal region of the lateral telencephalic vesicle. It is named the striatum because axon fi bers passing through the striatum give it a striped appearance. In rodents, the caudate and putamen are a single structure with fi bers of the internal capsule coursing through, but in carnivores and primates, the caudate and putamen are separated by the internal capsule. The caudate and putamen receive input from the neocortex, and the size of these nuclei increases in parallel with the neocortex throughout phylogeny.Four major types of neurons have been described in the striatum. The typing is based on the size of the cell body, presence or absence of dendritic spines in individual neurons that have been stained with the Golgi technique or fi lled with horseradish peroxidase, and other staining properties. The fi rst and by far the most numerous neuron type is the medium spiny neuron ( The striatum receives excitatory input from nearly all the cerebral cortex. The cortical input uses glutamate as its neurotransmitter and terminates largely on the heads of the dendritic spines of medium spiny neurons ( Although the topography and somatotopy imply a certain degree of parallel organization, there is also convergence and divergence in the corticostriatal projection. The large dendritic fi elds of medium spiny neurons allow them to receive input from adjacent projections, which arise from different areas of cortex. Inputs from more than one cortical area overlap In addition to cortical input, medium spiny striatal neurons receive a number of other inputs: (1) excitatory and presumed glutamatergic inputs from intralaminar and ventrolateral nuclei of the thalamus; (2) cholinergic input from large aspiny neurons; (3) GABA, substance P, and enkephalin input from adjacent medium spiny striatal neurons; (4) GABA input from small interneurons; and (5) a large input from dopamine (DA)-containing neurons in the SNpc. The DA input is of particular interest because of its role in Parkinson's disease (PD, see later).The DA input to the striatum terminates largely on the shafts of the dendritic spines of medium spiny neurons ( Although there are no apparent regional differences in the striatum based on cell morphology, an intricate internal organization has been revealed with special stains. When the striatum is stained for acetyl-cholinesterase (AChE), the enzyme that inactivates acetylcholine (Chapter 8), there is a patchy distribution of lightly staining regions within more heavily stained regions. The AChE-poor patches have been called striosomes and the AChE-rich areas have been called the extrastriosomal matrix Medium spiny neurons contain the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. In addition, medium spiny neurons have peptide neurotransmitters that are colocalized with GABA. Based on both the type of neurotransmitters and the type of DA receptor they contain, medium spiny neurons can be divided into two populations. One population contains GABA, dynorphin, and substance P and primarily expresses D1 receptors. These neurons send axons to GPi and to SNpr. Although substance P generally is thought to be an excitatory neurotransmitter, the predominant effect of these neurons is inhibition of their targets. The second population contains GABA and enkephalin and primarily expresses D2 receptors. These neuronsEnkephalin / GABA Substance P / Dynorphin / GABA FIGURE 31.7 The two chemically different populations of striatal medium spiny neurons are intermixed. One population (blue) projects to the globus pallidus external segment (GPe) and contains GABA and enkephalin. The other population (red) projects to the globus pallidus internal segment (GPi) and substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNpr) and contains GABA, dynorphin, and substance P (red).Participation of the basal ganglia in normal motor control is an old idea dating back to the early part of this century. The British neurologist S. A. Kinnier Wilson described a disease that included muscular rigidity, tremor, and weakness that was associated with pathological changes in the liver and in the putamen (hepatolenticular degeneration). Wilson noted that several features seen with damage to the corticospinal tracts were not present in this disease and postulated that the motor abnormalities were due to disease of an "extrapyramidal" motor system. Wilson postulated that basal ganglia (striatum and globus pallidus) were the major constituents of this "extrapyramidal" motor system that he viewed to be independent of the "pyramidal" (corticospinal) motor system. In a later writing, Wilson developed the view of two motor systems, the phylogenetically "old" extrapyramidal system and the phylogenetically "new" pyramidal system In the 1960s, more modern anatomical techniques showed that the bulk of basal ganglia output went via the thalamus to motor cortical areas. In this sense, basal ganglia output was "prepyramidal," not extrapyramidal. With the developing model of initiation of movement by the basal ganglia, the prepyramidal location was emphasized as the most important basal ganglia output. More recently, it has been possible to inject a different colored fl uorescent dye into each of two downstream targets to fi nd out if individual upstream neurons project to both targets. It was found that the vast majority of neurons in GPi branch and project both to the thalamus and to the brain stem. Hence, the basal ganglia are both prepyramidal and extrapyramidal. Although we now know that the basal ganglia can act through the pyramidal system and that there are many extrapyramidal motor systems that project to the spinal cord independent of the pyramidal tract, the phrase "extrapyramidal motor system" is still used to refer to the basal ganglia and to the disorders that result from basal ganglia damage.Reference Arnold, London.inputs that have been termed matrisomes. The bulk of the output from cells in the matrix is to both segments of the GP and to SNpr. The striosomes receive input from the prefrontal cortex and send output to SNpc.Immunohistochemical techniques have demonstrated that many substances, such as substance P, dynorphin, and enkephalin, have a patchy distribution that may be partly or wholly in register with the striosomes The STN is located at the junction of the diencephalon and midbrain, ventral to the thalamus and rostral and lateral to the red nucleus. Embryologically, it develops from the lateral hypothalamic cell column. Phylogenetically, it increases in size in proportion to the neocortex. The STN receives an excitatory, glutamatergic input from the frontal cortex with large contributions from motor areas, including the primary motor cortex (area 4), premotor and supplementary motor cortex (area 6), and frontal eye fi elds (area 8). The STN also receives an inhibitory GABA input from GPe. The output from the STN is excitatory and glutamatergic. STN projects to GPi and SNpr as well, projecting back to GPe.Although the STN receives input from the neocortex and projects to both segments of GP and to SNpr, it is different from striatum in several ways. Unlike striatum, the cortical input to the STN is from the frontal lobe only. The output from STN is excitatory, whereas the output from striatum is inhibitory. Of the two routes from the cortex to GPi, GPe, and SNpr, the excitatory route through STN (5-8 ms) is faster than the inhibitory route through striatum (15-20 ms). The pathway from cerebral cortex via STN to GPi and SNpr has been called the "hyperdirect pathway" because it is the fastest route for information fl ow from cerebral cortex to the basal ganglia output ( GP lies medial to the putamen and rostral to the hypothalamus. Embryologically, it arises from the lateral hypothalamic cell column. In primates, GP is separated into an internal segment and an external segment by a fi ber tract called the internal medullary lamina. In rodents and carnivores, the internal segment lies within the internal capsule and is called the entopeduncular nucleus. GPe is not a principal source of output from the basal ganglia and it is considered later.The GPi is composed primarily of large neurons that project outside of the basal ganglia. The dendritic trees of GPi neurons radiate from the cell body in a disc-like distribution and are oriented so that the faces of the disc are perpendicular to incoming axons from the striatum. The dendrites of an individual GPi cell can span up to 1 mm in diameter and therefore GPi neurons have the potential to receive a large number of converging inputs.The principal inputs to GPi are from striatum and the STN. These two types of inputs differ in the neurotransmitters used, in their physiological action, and in their pattern of termination. As noted earlier, neurons projecting from striatum to GPi contain GABA, substance P, and dynorphin, and are inhibitory. Each axon from the striatum enters GPi and sparsely contacts several neurons in passing before ensheathing a single neuron with a dense termination. This pathway has been called the "direct" striatopallidal pathway ( The output from GPi is inhibitory and, like the input to this structure from striatum, uses GABA as its neurotransmitter. The majority (70%) of the GPi output is sent via collaterals to both the thalamus and the brain stem. In the thalamus, axons from GPi terminate in the oral part of the ventrolateral nucleus (VLo) and in the Striatum STN GPi FIGURE 31.8 The two primary inputs to globus pallidus internal segment (GPi) have different patterns of termination. Axons from the subthalamic nucleus (green) are excitatory and terminate extensively on multiple GPi neurons. Axons from the striatum (red) contact several GPi neurons weakly in passing before terminating densely on a single neuron.principal part of the ventral anterior nucleus (VApc). In turn, these thalamic nuclei project to the motor, premotor, supplementary motor, and prefrontal cortex. They also project back to striatum in a potential feedback loop. Some evidence suggests that an individual GPi neuron sends output via the thalamus to just one area of the cortex Collaterals of the axons projecting from GPi to the thalamus project to an area at the junction of the midbrain and pons near the pedunculopontine nucleus, Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common progressive neurodegenerative disorder. Patients with PD experience slowness of movement, rigidity, a lowfrequency rest tremor, and diffi culty with balance. These major motoric features of PD are due to the degeneration of dopamine (DA) containing neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNC) with an accompanying loss of DA and its metabolites in the striatum. PD patients may exhibit other symptoms, including cognitive dysfunction, depression, anxiety, autonomic problems, and disturbances of sleep, which may be due to the degeneration of non-DA-containing neurons. PD is characterized pathologically by the cytoplasmic accumulation of aggregated proteins with a halo of radiating fi brils and a less defi ned core known as Lewy bodies. Measures of increased oxidative stress are also seen, including glutathione depletion, iron deposition, increased markers of lipid peroxidation, oxidative DNA damage and protein oxidation, and decreased expression and activity of mitochondrial complex 1 in the SNC. This mitochondrial complex 1 defect is specifi c to the SNC, as it has not been observed in other neurodegenerative diseases. Thus, in sporadic PD, oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction appear to play prominent roles in the death of DA neurons. The majority of PD appears to be sporadic in nature, however, an estimated 10% of cases are familial, with specifi c genetic defects. The identifi cation of these rare genes and their functions has provided tremendous insight into the pathogenesis of PD and opened up new areas of investigation.Two genes have been clearly linked to PD: a-synuclein and parkin. a-Synuclein is a presynaptic protein and a primary component of Lewy bodies. Very rare missense mutations at A53T and A30P cause autosomal-dominant PD. How derangements in a-synuclein lead to dysfunction and death of neurons is not known. However, aggregation and fi brillization are thought to play a central role, perhaps leading to a dysfunction in protein handling by inhibiting the proteasome. The second "PD gene" parkin is an E3 ligase for the ubiquitination of proteins. Mutations in parkin include exonic deletions, insertions, and several missense mutations and result in autosomal recessive PD. Parkin mutations are now considered to be one of the major causes of familial PD. Substrates for parkin include the synaptic vesicle-associated protein CDCrel-1, which may regulate synaptic vesicle release in the nervous system. Whether CDCrel-1 is involved in the release of dopamine is not yet known. Synphilin-1 is a protein of unknown function that was identifi ed as an a-synuclein interacting protein. It is a synaptic vesicle-enriched protein and is present in Lewy bodies. Synphilin-1 is a target of parkin, and expression of synphilin-1 with a-synuclein results in the formation of Lewy body-like aggregates that are ubiquitinated in the presence of parkin. Parkin is upregulated by unfolded protein stress, and expression of parkin suppresses unfolded protein stress-induced toxicity. The unfolded putative G-protein-coupled transmembrane receptor, the parkin-associated, endotheliallike receptor (Pael-R), is a parkin substrate. When overexpressed, Pael-R becomes unfolded, insoluble, and causes unfolded protein-induced cell death. Parkin ubiquitinates Pael-R, and coexpression of parkin results in protection against Pael-R-induced cell toxicity. Pael-R accumulates in the brains of autosomal-recessive Parkinson's disease patients and thus may be an important parkin substrate.Ultimately, it would be of interest to link all the multiple genes and the sporadic causes of PD into a common pathogenic biochemical pathway. Derangements in protein handling seem to be central in the pathogenesis of familial PD. Oxidative stress seems to play a prominent role in sporadic PD, and oxidative stress leads to synuclein aggregation and/or proteasomal dysfunction. Data suggest that there may be selective derangements in the proteasomal system in the substantia nigra of sporadic PD. Thus, protein mishandling may be central to the pathogenesis of PD.In contrast to most other neurodegenerative disorders, there is effective temporary symptomatic treatment for PD consisting of DA replacement with levodopa or DA agonists and adjunctive medications or surgical approaches. Because the neurodegeneration in PD is progressive and there is no proven preventative, restorative, or regenerative therapy, patients eventually become quite disabled. Ultimately, to affect a true cure, the underlying mechanisms of neuronal cell death need to be understood, strategies for enhancing neuronal survival and regrowth need to be developed, and consideration needs to be made toward the replacement of cells lost during the degenerative process. If these goals can be obtained, a full recovery could be achieved. V. MOTOR SYSTEMS which has been termed the "midbrain extrapyramidal area." The midbrain extrapyramidal area projects in turn to the reticulospinal motor system. Other GPi neurons (20%) project to intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus or to the lateral habenula.Like the GP, the SN is divided into two segments. One is a densely cellular region called the pars compacta (SNpc) and the other is more sparsely cellular and is called the pars reticulata (SNpr). The pars compacta contains DA cells and is not a principal output nucleus of the basal ganglia. It is considered later. SNpr has features similar to GPi, including cell size, histochemistry, and connectional anatomy.Like GPi, the SNpr contains large neurons that project outside of the basal ganglia. The dendritic trees are less disc-like than those of GPi neurons, but like GPi neurons they extend up to 1 mm and thus receive a wide fi eld of inputs. As in the case of GPi, the SNpr receives inhibitory inputs from striatum direct pathways that contain GABA, SP, and dynorphin and excitatory inputs from STN that contain glutamate and provides inhibitory, GABAergic outputs. In the case of SNpr, these outputs are to the medial part of the ventro-lateral thalamus (VLm) and the magnocellular part of the ventral anterior thalamus (VAmc). These thalamic areas in turn project to the premotor and prefrontal cortex. Like the GPi output, SNpr sends collaterals to the midbrain extrapyramidal area and also has a projection to intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus. A primary difference in the outputs of GPi and SNpr is that the lateral portion of SNpr sends an inhibitory projection to the superior colliculus and to the paralaminar part of the medial dorsal thalamus (MDpl). MDpl projects in turn to the frontal eye fi elds. Thus, the lateral portion of SNpr is connected with cortical and brain stem areas that control eye movements.The GPe is one of two nuclei that may be viewed as intrinsic nuclei of the basal ganglia. The other is the SNpc, which is considered in the next section. Both GPe and SNpc receive the bulk of their input from and send the bulk of their output to other basal ganglia nuclei.GPe receives an inhibitory projection from the striatum and an excitatory one from STN. The patterns of termination of the striatal and STN afferents are similar in that the striatal input is focused and convergent while the STN input is divergent The SNpc is perhaps the most studied structure in the basal ganglia. The SNpc is made up of large DAcontaining cells and it is these neurons that degenerate in PD, which is characterized by abnormal movement. DA neurons contain a substance called neuromelanin, which is a dark pigment that gives the SNpc a blackish appearance and appears to represent an oxidation product of DA. This is the basis for its name (substantia nigra = black substance). SNpc receives input from the striatum, specifi cally from the striosomes and a more sparse input from prefrontal frontal cortex. The SNpc DA neurons project to all of caudate and putamen in a topographic manner. However, nigral DA neurons receive inputs from one striatal circuit and project back to the same and to adjacent circuits To review:1. The striatum receives input from nearly all the cerebral cortex such that several functionally related cortical areas project to overlapping striatal zones and that an individual cortical area projects to several striatal zones. Cortical areas that are not functionally related project to separate zones of the striatum, although there may be some interaction between adjacent zones.2. The striatum sends a focused and convergent inhibitory projection to the basal ganglia output nuclei, GPi and SNpr. 3. The STN receives input from the frontal lobe, especially from the motor, premotor, and supplementary motor cortex and from the frontal eye fi elds. 4. The STN sends a fast divergent excitatory projection to GPi and SNpr. 5. There are reciprocal and loop-like connections among basal ganglia nuclei that may play a negative or positive feedback role or may result in focusing of signals. 6. The output from the basal ganglia (GPi and SNpr) is inhibitory and projects to motor areas in the brain stem and thalamus. 7. There are no direct connections between the basal ganglia and the spinal sensory or motor apparatus.There is some disagreement among basal ganglia experts whether to view the overall anatomic organization of the basal ganglia as convergent or as multiple parallel segregated loops through the basal ganglia, each with a separate output. In support of convergence are (1) the reduction of the number of neurons at each level from the cortex to striatum to GPi and SNpr; (2) the large number of synapses on each striatal neuron; (3) the large dendritic trees of striatal, GPi, and SNpr neurons; and (4) interaction across circuits mediated by SNpc and GPe neurons. In support of parallel segregated loops are (1) the preserved somatotopy with separate representations of the face, arm, and leg in the cortex, striatum, and GPi/SNpr; (2) the relative preservation of topography through the basal ganglia (e.g., the prefrontal cortex to caudate to SNpr to VA thalamus to the prefrontal cortex and motor cortex to putamen to GPi to VLo thalamus to motor cortex); and (3) the fi nding that separate groups of GPi neurons project via the thalamus to separate motor areas of the cortex. It appears that there is local convergence and global parallelism, but it remains unknown whether the parallel pathways are functionally segregated or to what degree there is interaction at the interfaces between functionally different pathways.Although the anatomic organization may provide some clues as to what might be the function of basal ganglia circuits, inference of function from anatomy is speculative. One approach to studying the function of an area of the central nervous system is to record the electrical activity of individual neurons with an extracellular electrode in awake, behaving animals. Other approaches involve inferences of neuronal signaling from imaging studies of blood fl ow and metabolism, or of changes in gene expression. By sampling the signal of a part of the brain during behavior, one can gain some insight into what role that part might play in behavior. Neurons within different basal ganglia nuclei have characteristic baseline discharge patterns that change with movement. If an animal is trained to perform a task consistently, the activity of single neurons can be correlated with individual aspects of the task performance. Furthermore, the timing of neural activity in one part can be compared to the timing of another and to the timing of the movement. This section emphasizes signals in the basal ganglia that are correlated with movement or the preparation for movement.In awake animals, the majority of striatal neurons (80-90%) have low baseline discharge rates of 0.1 to 1 Hz ( Striatal neurons related to movement have a distinct somatotopy with the face represented ventromedially and the leg dorsolaterally. They tend to occur in clusters of neurons with similar discharge characteristics. These clusters of physiologically similar neurons may correspond to the anatomically defi ned matrisomes described earlier. Movement-related activity changes typically are observed as increases above the very low baseline. On average, movement-related striatal neurons fi re 20 msec prior to movement ( Striatal neurons active in relation to eye movements are located in a longitudinal zone in the central part of the caudate nucleus. This region receives input from the frontal and supplementary eye fi elds in the cortex. Similar to striatal neurons related to limb movements, striatal neurons related to eye movements may discharge during preparation for the movement or during the movement. Caudate neurons involved in saccades are strongly modulated by reward expectation The timing of neuronal activity related to limb or eye movements is important to understanding the function of those neurons in the production of movement. In the putamen, most movement-related activity is late, occurring on average after the onset of muscle activity responsible for producing the movement. When compared to activity in the cerebral cortex, movement-related putamen neurons fi re after those in the motor cortex and supplementary motor area. Putamen neurons related to movement preparation also fi re substantially later than cortical neurons involved in movement preparation. Caudate neurons related to eye movements fi re late relative to oculomotor areas of cortex. The late timing of striatal discharge during movement and movement preparation relative to discharge in cortical areas suggests that the striatum is not involved primarily in the initiation of movement. Instead, it receives information from cortical areas that are responsible for movement generation and may use that information for facilitation, gating, or scaling of cortically initiated movement.A subset of striatal neurons (10%) is tonically active with discharge rates of 2 to 10 Hz. These neurons are distributed throughout the striatum and their discharge bears no specifi c relation to movement. These tonically active neurons (TANs) fi re in relation to certain sensory stimuli that are associated with reward. For example, a TAN will fi re in relation to a clicking sound if the click precedes a fruit juice reward but will not fi re to the click alone or to the reward alone Neurons in the STN are tonically active with average baseline discharge rates of about 20 Hz As described earlier, GPi and SNpr form the output of the basal ganglia. Just as they are similar anatomically, they are also similar physiologically. Neurons in these output structures are tonically active with average fi ring rates of 60 to 80 Hz The discharge of many GPi neurons correlates with the direction of limb movement, but most GPi activity is not correlated with other physical parameters of movement, including joint position, force production, movement amplitude, or movement velocity. Few GPi neurons have activity correlated with the pattern of muscle activity. Like striatum, some GPi neurons have activity related to movement preparation. During a reaching movement, 25% of GPi neurons are related to movement preparation and 50% are related to movement, but many neurons have more than one type of response. Approximately 70% of arm movementrelated GPi neurons increase activity and 30% decrease activity from this tonic baseline during movement. Because the output from GPi is inhibitory, the large proportion of activity increases during movement translates to broad inhibition of thalamic and brain stem targets with more restricted facilitation during movement.The timing of movement-related GPi activity is late compared to the activation of agonist muscles. The average onset of GPi activity is after the onset of EMG but before the onset of movement Like GPi neurons, SNpr neurons are tonically active. SNpr is the principal basal ganglia output for the control of eye movements, and most studies of SNpr activity have been in eye movement tasks Some SNpr neurons have their strongest relation to saccades made to remembered targets. Thus, if a visual target is presented and then removed and a monkey is trained to look to where the target had been, some SNpr cells will fi re more in this condition as compared to when a saccade is made to a visible target. Some SNpr neurons have activity related to the preparation for eye movement. One-third of SNpr cells have activity related to saccades to a visual target. Another third of SNpr cells have activity related to saccades to a remembered target location. During saccades, the time of SNpr activity change is just after that in the superior colliculus, a structure that is known to be involved in the initiation of saccades. Thus, for eye movements, as well as limb movements, the basal ganglia output acts after structures that initiate movement.Two types of neurons have been described in GPe based on their baseline activity patterns. Most fi re at a high frequency (70 Hz) that is interrupted by long pauses. A smaller number fi re at a low frequency (10 Hz on average) and have frequent spontaneous bursts of activity. Both types of neurons change activity in relation to limb movement and, for the majority, these changes are increases in activity. As has been described for GPi, GPe neurons weakly and inconsistently code for movement amplitude, velocity, muscle length, or force. Like the other structures of the basal ganglia, the activity of movement-related activity is late.The activity of single neurons in the SNpc of trained animals is different from the activity of single neurons in the other basal ganglia structures. At baseline, SNpc neurons fi re at a low rate (2 Hz on average). The activity of these neurons is not related to movement itself and there is no apparent somatotopy in SNpc. The neurons carry little specifi c information regarding sensory modality or spatial properties. The activity of SNpc neurons does change in relation to behaviorally signifi cant events such as reward or the presentation of instructional cues. The responses to stimuli occur only if the stimulus is presented in the context of a movement task. Furthermore, the activity changes with conditioning. As an example, consider an SNpc neuron that fi res in relation to an unexpected reward. If one records from this neuron over several trials while the reward is paired with a tone that precedes the reward, the SNpc neuron will gradually stop fi ring in relation to the reward and instead will begin to fi re in relation to the tone that predicts the reward.Thus, it appears that SNpc DA neurons can predict the occurrence of a signifi cant behavioral event. In this way, SNpc neurons are similar to the TANs neurons described earlier. Remember that SNpc neurons also synapse extensively on medium spiny striatal neurons and that DA terminals are on the shafts of dendritic spines. It has been suggested that the DA input changes the sensitivity of striatal neurons to cortical inputs that terminate on the heads of dendritic spines. If so, the activity of SNpc neurons could modify the response of striatal neurons to cortical input that occurs in a specifi c behavioral context. Such infl uences may be related to the apparent ability of DA to mediate both longterm potentiation and long-term depression in striatal neurons, which in turn is likely to be an important mediator of learning and plasticity in the striatum (see Chapters 49 and 50).Several general statements about basal ganglia movement-related neuronal discharge can be made.1. Movement-related neurons in the striatum, STN, GP, and SNpr are arranged somatotopically. 2. Neurons in the striatum are quiet at rest and increase during movement. Neurons in STN are tonically active and increase during movement. Recalling the anatomy, this means that GPi neurons receive a widespread, tonically active excitatory input and a focused, intermittent inhibitory input. 3. Neurons in both GPe and GPi are tonically active.Most increase activity, but up to one-third decrease activity during limb movement. 4. Neurons in SNpr are also tonically active. Those that are related to saccadic eye movements decrease activity during the movement. 5. Neurons in SNpc discharge in relation to rewards and behaviorally relevant stimuli, but not to movement. They are likely to play a critical role in some types of motor learning. 6. Changes in the activity of basal ganglia occur at the onset of movement but after the muscles are already active. Thus, they are unlikely to initiate movement.Valuable clues to the function of the basal ganglia have come from recording the activity of single neurons during behavior. However, correlation of neural activity with an aspect of behavior does not necessarily mean that neural activity causes that aspect of behavior. To better determine the role of the basal ganglia in THE EFFECT OF BASAL GANGLIA DAMAGE ON MOVEMENT behavior, one would want to selectively remove a specifi c component from an otherwise intact system. Certain human neurological diseases involve the degeneration of neurons in the basal ganglia. Historically, these diseases fueled great interest and have provided some insight into basal ganglia function. The movement disorders that result from basal ganglia damage are often dramatic. Depending on the site of the pathology, some basal ganglia diseases cause extreme slowness of movement and rigidity and others cause uncontrollable involuntary movements. Although human diseases are of great interest, they often affect more than one structure. This necessarily limits the power of functional models derived from the study of human basal ganglia diseases. In experimental animals, more selective lesions can be made, but until recently it was diffi cult to reproduce the movement disorders associated with human basal ganglia disease.Experimental lesions can be made in a number of ways. Permanent lesions can be made by passing electric current through an electrode to destroy both cell bodies and axons in the area surrounding the electrode. This has the disadvantage of destroying axon fi bers that are passing through the area but that are not necessarily part of the structure of interest. Injection of a small amount of certain toxic chemicals into the brain (e.g., kainic acid or ibotenic acid) results in the focal death of neurons with cell bodies in the area of the injection but axons passing through the area are spared. Agonists and antagonists of the GABA have been injected into to the brain to cause temporary, focal inactivation or disinhibition of neurons. The effect of these chemicals lasts for several hours followed by complete return to the normal state. Later we discuss the use of toxins to produce a third type of lesion, one that can remove a particular type of neurons, while leaving others intact. This section reviews the results of selective basal ganglia lesions in animals produced by a variety of techniques. We discuss human basal ganglia diseases in the context of these experiments.Lesions in the striatum produce variable results that depend on the location of the lesion, the lesion method, and what is measured. Many studies of unilateral striatal lesions in monkeys have described only minimal defi cits. In human patients, strokes localized to the putamen often cause dystonia, a syndrome characterized by abnormal sustained muscle contraction causing twisting postures. If the putamen is inactivated pharmacologically with the GABA agonist muscimol unilaterally, the result is slow movement of the contralateral limb. The slowed movement is associated with an increased activity of antagonist muscles. Although movement is slow after putamen lesions, reaction time is generally normal, indicating movement initiation is intact. Large bilateral electrolytic lesions result in the paucity of movement, severe slowness of movement bilaterally, and postural abnormalities. In other studies, there appears to be little effect of experimental bilateral electrolytic putamen lesions. The reason for this discrepancy is not clear, but it may be due to differences in lesion size.Huntington's disease (HD) is a genetically based, degenerative disease in humans that results in disabling involuntary movements. These movements are called chorea (Greek for "dance"). They are frequent, brief, sudden, random twitch-like movements that involve all parts of the body and resemble fragments of normal voluntary movement. As the disease progresses, muscular rigidity appears. Despite the excessive involuntary movements, the voluntary movements of patients with HD are slower than normal. The pathologic hallmark of HD is a marked loss of neurons in the striatum. Studies have shown that not all striatal neurons are equally affected in HD In human patients, stroke involving the STN and in monkeys, electrolytic or pharmacological lesions in the STN cause dramatic involuntary fl inging movements of the contralateral arm and leg. These movements have been called hemiballismus. They resemble chorea in their brief, random, and sudden nature, but they tend to be much larger in amplitude. After a lesion in STN, the hemiballism lasts for days to weeks before gradually resolving. Animals and humans with hemiballism can still make voluntary movements and often the voluntary movements appear to be quite normal. It has been suggested that the mechanism underlying the hemiballism is a loss of excitatory input to GPi, resulting in decreased GPi activity and ultimately in the disinhibition of cortical and brain stem motor mechanisms Lesions of the GPi result in slowing of movement but normal movement initiation. Because of their close proximity to each other, it is diffi cult to lesion GPi without including part of GPe or vice versa. Therefore, caution must be used in interpreting results of GP lesions. However, in most cases, combined GPe and GPi lesions have a similar effect to the lesion of GPi alone. Unilateral lesions of GPe and GPi result in slowness of movement, with abnormal cocontraction of agonist and antagonist muscles, but normal initiation of movement. Bilateral lesions of GPe and GPi result in even more severely abnormal fl exed postures with an apparent inability to move out of them. Electrolytic lesions producing this severe abnormality have tended to be large, involving both GPe and GPi and part of the internal capsule. Similar abnormalities are seen with carbon monoxide or carbon disulfi de poisoning, which results in neuron death in GPi and SNpr.Lesions restricted to GPi result in slowness of movement of the contralateral limbs. After GPi lesions, reaction time is normal, which indicates that mechanisms involved in the initiation of movement are intact. In some studies, the slowness of movement is accompanied by a cocontraction of agonist and antagonist muscles, which results in abnormal postures (dystonia). In most cases, there is relatively more activity of fl exor muscles that is refl ected in a tendency of the limbs to assume an abnormally fl exed posture. Monkeys with GPi lesions are more impaired when movements are made by turning off active muscles than when movements are made by further turning on active muscles Due to its proximity to SNpc, it is diffi cult to produce electrolytic lesions exclusively in SNpr. However, with the use of the GABA agonist muscimol, it has been possible to inactivate neurons focally in SNpr. Injection of muscimol into the lateral SNpr inactivates neurons that are normally involved in saccadic eye movements. Inactivation in this area results in an inability to maintain visual fi xation because of involuntary saccades Lesions of SNpc are of particular interest because the DA neurons in this nucleus die in Parkinson's disease (PD). PD is a neurological disease that affects older adults. The main symptoms of PD are (1) tremor at rest that decreases during movement, (2) slowness of movement (bradykinesia), (3) paucity of movement (akinesia), (4) muscular rigidity, and (5) unstable posture. The primary pathology in PD is a progressive degeneration of neurons in the SNpc. Additionally, there is some degree of loss of DA neurons in the ventral tegmental area and of norepinephrine neurons in the locus coeruleus. Although PD has been recognized for over a century, it only has been since the early 1980s that a complete animal model has been available. As noted earlier, the interdigitation of SNpc and SNpr has made selective electrolytic lesions of SNpc or SNpr diffi cult to produce. In the 1960s, it was found that 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) produces specifi c lesions of catecholamine neurons. Therefore, injection of 6-OHDA into the rat SN bilaterally produces a selective loss of SNpc DA neurons. Lesions made in this way result in some of the abnormalities of PD, namely the slowness of movement and rigidity, but they did not produce tremor. In the 1980s, a street drug contaminant called MPTP (Box 31.3) was found to produce all the symptoms of PD in humans and in certain species of monkeys. The MPTP monkey has proven an extremely valuable model with which to explore this disease.Despite extensive investigation, the fundamental mechanism of the tremor in PD is not known. Some evidence suggests that it results from abnormal bursting of neurons in the thalamus. Other evidence suggests it is due to abnormal synchronous bursting of GPi neurons. The slowness of movement in PD has been associated with a reduced magnitude and duration of muscle activity during movement. In monkeys that have been given 6-OHDA or MPTP, the activity of motor cortex neurons during arm movements is also reduced compared with normal monkeys. In the MPTP monkey model of PD, some animals have abnormally increased activity of STN and GPi and decreased activity of GPi. GPi neurons in the MPTP monkey have abnormal bursting activity and abnormally increased responses to somatosensory stimuli. It has been suggested that the increased activity of GPi causes an excess inhibition of motor mechanisms in the cortex and brain stem and that this excess inhibition causes movements to be slow Up until the early 1980s, the quest for a complete animal model of Parkinson's disease (PD) was largely unsuccessful. Although some of the abnormalities of PD could be caused by electrolytic lesion of SNpc or by injecting the neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine into SNpc, neither of these methods produced the full syndrome of PD. Then, in 1982 an unfortunate, but fortuitous, accident happened. Four young drug users in northern California developed symptoms of PD. Because PD is highly unusual in young adults, the neurologists caring for these patients began a search for the cause Subsequently, it has been found that MPTP produces a Parkinson's-like syndrome in several species of monkeys. Unlike previous models, monkeys given MPTP had not only slowness of movement, paucity of movement, and rigidity, but also tremor. The Parkinson's-like syndrome in monkeys given MPTP is associated with a nearly complete degeneration of DA neurons in SNpc and the ventral tegmental area and variable degeneration in the locus coeruleus. MPTP monkeys improve when given the DA precursor L-DOPA and have side effects of chorea when they are given too much L-DOPA, similar to what happens in people with PD. Hence, by behavioral, pharmacological, and pathological measures, the MPTP monkey is an excellent model of human PD. It is currently used to study the pathophysiology and pharmacology of PD and it has lead to new ideas about possible causes of PD. One such idea is that environmental toxins may play a role in the etiology of PD. In this regard, it is important to note that paraquat and rotenone, two compounds that are used commonly as pesticides and/or herbicides, both have MPTP-like structures and have also been shown to damage DA neurons.Reference Langston, J. W., bursting and oscillatory fi ring is seen more consistently. Thus, it appears that the abnormal patterns of GPi activity may be more important than the more modest increase in average fi ring rate. The rigidity of PD has been attributed in part to hyperactivity of the transcortical stretch refl ex. Normally, the transcortical stretch refl ex is active to resist displacement from an actively held posture. It is inhibited when subjects are instructed not to resist the displacement. People with PD have abnormally increased transcortical stretch refl exes and are unable to suppress them in response to instruction. The inability to inhibit long-loop refl exes may also account for the postural instability of PD. Patients with PD have an inappropriate cocontraction of leg and back muscles in response to perturbation from an upright stance. When the same subjects perturbed from a sitting position, they are not able to inhibit the postural refl exes that were active during stance. This suggests that the mechanism of rigidity and postural instability may be similar and that they refl ect an inability to suppress unwanted refl ex activity.Paradoxically, it is known that lesions of GPi or STN can ameliorate many or all of the signs and symptoms of PD without producing the abnormalities associated with lesions in these areas in normal animals or humans. This is particularly paradoxical for GPi lesions that can produce the signs of PD (fl exed posture, slow movement, rigidity) in normal monkeys and in some rare human diseases, but can reduce or eliminate those signs in monkeys and humans with preexisting lesions of the DA system. Why this is the case is not known, but it may relate to long-term changes in basal ganglia physiology that result from chronic DA depletion.Chronic, high-frequency stimulation of the STN or GPi has been found to be effective for the treatment of symptoms in advanced PD. This has been called deep brain stimulation (DBS). There is active investigation into mechanisms by which DBS works and the exact mechanism is not fully understood. However, it 742 31. THE BASAL GANGLIA V. MOTOR SYSTEMS appears that DBS activates efferents from the site of stimulation and disrupts abnormal patterns of neural transmission To review the preceding section: How do the basal ganglia participate in motor control? Several hypotheses have been advanced over the past century, many of which have been mutually contradictory. This has been due in part to models that infer normal function from the abnormalities resulting from basal ganglia disease. There is growing consensus that models based on human disease states may not be suffi cient to explain normal basal ganglia function. Regardless, the models based on human disease have been useful in developing new treatments for movement disorders and for the development of testable hypotheses relating to basal ganglia function.An old model of basal ganglia function is that the basal ganglia initiate movement. This model was based in large part on the manifestation of basal ganglia diseases. The paucity and slowness of movement in PD were attributed to an inability to initiate movements, whereas the involuntary movements of chorea and hemiballism were attributed to a release of normal motor systems from basal ganglia control. This model gained support from the fact that much of the output from the basal ganglia goes to parts of the thalamus that project to the premotor and motor cortex. It was argued that motor programs are stored in the basal ganglia and are called up and sent to the motor cortex for execution. This model is no longer widely accepted because it is now apparent that basal ganglia are active relatively late in relation to movement and to the activation of those brain mechanisms that are known to be involved in initiation. Furthermore, lesions of basal ganglia output nuclei do not delay the initiation of movement.If basal ganglia do not initiate movement, what do they do? We consider three current hypotheses. One hypothesis states that although basal ganglia do not initiate movement, they contribute to the automatic execution of movement sequences. This hypothesis suggests that other mechanisms initiate the fi rst component in a sequence, but that basal ganglia contain the programs for completion of the sequence. The second hypothesis states that the basal ganglia circuitry is made up of opposing parallel pathways that adjust the magnitude of the inhibitory GPi output in order to increase or decrease movement. According to this hypothesis, increased GPi output slows movements and decreased GPi output increases movement. The third hypothesis states that basal ganglia act to permit desired movements and to inhibit unwanted competing movements.A popular hypothesis states that basal ganglia are responsible for the automatic execution of learned movement sequences Another experiment involved recording the activity of GPi neurons in monkeys trained to perform two successive prompt wrist movements. It was found that some GPi neurons fi red after the fi rst component of the movement but before the second component Additional support for this hypothesis comes from experimental work showing correlation of striatal neuron activity patterns with sequence learning This hypothesis emphasizes the two major paths of information fl ow from the striatum to GPi and SNpr that were described earlier ( pathways from putamen to GPi. See the text for a description. Red symbols represent inhibitory pathways, and green symbols represent excitatory pathways. From The output of the basal ganglia is inhibitory to posture and movement pattern generators in the cerebral cortex (via thalamus) and in the brain stem. The inhibitory output neurons fi re tonically at high frequencies. In this hypothesis, the motor output of the basal ganglia is analogous to a brake How might this mechanism work? When one makes a voluntary movement, that movement is initiated by the prefrontal, premotor, and motor cortex and by the cerebellum. The premotor and motor cortex send a corollary signal to STN, exciting it. STN projects to GPi in a widespread pattern and excites GPi. In parallel, signals are sent from the cortex to the striatum, which inhibits GPi focally via a direct pathway. Striatum can also disinhibit GPi via two indirect pathways (striatum → GPe → GPi and striatum → GPe → STN → GPi). The indirect pathways further focus the effects of the fast excitatory cortico-STN pathway and the slower inhibitory cortico-striatal pathway to GPi. The net result is to release the "brake" from the selected voluntary movement pattern generator and to apply the "brake" to potentially competing posture-holding pattern generators (transcortical, vestibular, tonic neck, and other postural refl exes). The result is the focused selection of desired motor patterns and surround inhibition of competing patterns. Disruption of this organization at different nodes can lead to specifi c movement disorders.Although the focus of this chapter has been on motor control, it has become increasingly clear that the basal ganglia participate in a variety of nonmotor functions. These include functions of the limbic system (see There is increasing evidence for a role of the basal ganglia in procedural learning. Much of the research There are nuclei in the brain that historically have not been included with the basal ganglia, but that are analogous to the traditional components. These lie ventral to the neostriatum and GP and are called the ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens and olfactory tubercle) and the ventral pallidum. The ventral striatum receives input from limbic and olfactory areas of the cortex, including the amygdala and hippocampus. Like the neostriatum, the ventral striatum receives a DA input, but it is from the ventral tegmental area (VTA), which lies medial to the SN. The ventral striatum sends a projection back to VTA and to the adjacent SNpr. The ventral pallidum is analogous to both GPe and GPi. It receives input from the ventral striatum and possibly from STN. Unlike the GP, the ventral pallidum receives direct input from the amygdala. The output of the ventral pallidum projects to the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus (DM) and from there to limbic areas of the cortex. By virtue of its inputs and outputs, the ventral system is closely linked to the limbic system. This linkage has led to the suggestion that the ventral system is involved in motivation and emotion (see Chapter 43). The exact nature of this role is not known, but it may be analogous to the motor role of the basal ganglia, with the inhibitory output of the ventral pallidum acting to suppress or select potentially competing limbic mechanisms. In addition, Haber and colleagues have described circuitry by which activity in the ventral system ultimately infl uences the other circuits of the basal ganglia has focused on the learning of tasks or of sequential behavior. There is evidence for a role of the basal ganglia in procedural learning that leads to the formation of habits and the performance of behavioral routines once they are learned It is appropriate to consider the basal ganglia as part of the motor system because the largest portion of the basal ganglia is devoted to motor control and the most prominent defi cits resulting from basal ganglia damage are motor. However, it has become clear that the basal ganglia play substantial roles in nonmotor function and in more cognitive aspects of movement. These roles are the subject of active research. Ultimately, a unifying theory of basal ganglia function that will encompass all the subdivisions is likely to emerge. Based on the circuitry and known physiology, it is likely that different cortico-basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuits employ similar mechanisms. Huntington's disease (HD) is an inherited progressive neurodegenerative disorder that affects about 1 in 10,000 people. Symptoms include abnormal movements (comprising both involuntary movements termed chorea or dystonia and motor incoordination), cognitive diffi culties, and emotional diffi culties, including depression, apathy, and irritability. Onset is usually in midlife, but can range between childhood and old age. HD is generally fatal within 15 to 20 years after onset. The disease is caused by an expanded CAG repeat coding for polyglutamine in the HD gene product, termed the "huntingtin" protein. CAG repeat lengths between about 10 and 25 are normal, whereas those above 36 cause HD. Within the expanded range, the longer the repeat, the earlier the age of onset. The normal function of huntingtin is poorly understood, but it may be involved with cytoskeletal function, or cellular transport.Pathologically, HD is characterized by selective neuronal vulnerability. The caudate and putamen of the corpus striatum are most affected in early stages, but as the disease progresses, other areas of the brain also become affected. Within the striatum, medium spiny GABA neurons are severely affected, with up to 95% loss in advanced cases, whereas large interneurons are relatively spared. In addition, there are intranuclear inclusion bodies and perinuclear and neuritic aggregates of huntingtin in HD neurons.The pathogenesis of HD is still incompletely understood and represents a challenge for neuroscience. The huntingtin protein is widely expressed throughout the brain and is expressed at lower levels in other regions of the body as well. HD, like other neurodegenerative diseases, involves abnormal protein folding and aggregation. The inclusions themselves appear not to be directly toxic, but they likely represent a late stage of an abnormal process, whose earlier steps are pathogenic. The study of the disease has been facilitated by the generation of cell models, invertebrate models, and mouse models. Chaperone proteins can ameliorate the pathology, perhaps by refolding abnormally folded huntingtin. Huntingtin may normally be degraded by intracellular proteolytic machinery, termed the proteasome, and inhibition of the proteasome may be one of the toxic effects of the abnormally expanded polyglutamine.A number of lines of evidence have pointed to a possible role for abnormal gene transcription in HD. Several studies have suggested that targeting of huntingtin to the nucleus enhances toxicity. Huntingtin may normally have a role in regulation of gene transcription, although this is poorly understood. Expression array studies show that mouse and cell models have an alteration of normal gene expression patterns. Abnormal interactions with coactivator and corepressor complexes may contribute.Whatever the initial mechanisms, symptoms appear to be caused by both cell dysfunction and cell death, with cell death correlating best with functional disability. Thus, preventing cell death is a major goal of experimental therapeutics in HD and other neurodegenerative disorders. Cell death may partly involve apoptotic mechanisms with activation of caspases and may also involve mechanisms such as excitotoxicity, metabolic, or free radical stress. Therapeutic strategies under investigation include protection of neurons with neurotrophins, altering abnormal gene transcription patterns, and reducing cell death with inhibitors of caspase activation or blockers of excitotoxicity.Christopher A. Ross BOX 31.5Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a chronic disorder characterized by recurrent intrusive thoughts and ritualistic behaviors that consume much of the affl icted individual's attentional and goal-directed processes. Among the more agonizing illnesses in clinical medicine, OCD is classifi ed as an anxiety disorder because of the marked tension and distress produced by resisting the obsessions and compulsions. Common obsessions involve thoughts of harming oneself or others, of being affl icted by various illnesses, or of being contaminated by germs. Compulsions may be a response to obsessive thoughts (e.g., repetitive hand-washing following skin contact with any object due to obsessive worries of having contacted germs) or may instead refl ect cognitive-behavioral rituals performed according to stereotyped rules (e.g., counting one's footsteps to avoid ending on certain numbers). Although individuals with OCD recognize that such thoughts and behaviors are irrational, they feel irresistibly compelled to engage in them.The onset of OCD usually occurs between late childhood and early adulthood. Without treatment, OCD is often disabling. However, chronic treatment with drugs that potently inhibit serotonin reuptake can reduce the amount of time engaged in obsessions and compulsions and the magnitude of the associated anxiety. In addition, behavioral therapy involving repeated in vivo exposure and response prevention (e.g., having patients touch a toilet seat and subsequently preventing them from hand washing) may facilitate extinction of the anxiety responses generated by resisting obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors.The etiology and pathophysiology of OCD are unknown. Converging evidence from analysis of the lesions that result in obsessive-compulsive symptoms, functional neuroimaging studies of OCD, and observations regarding the neurosurgical interventions that can ameliorate OCD implicate prefrontal cortical-striatal circuits in the pathogenesis of obsessions and compulsions. The neurological conditions associated with the development of secondary obsessions and compulsions include lesions of the globus pallidus and putamen, Sydenham chorea (a poststreptococcal autoimmune disorder associated with neuronal atrophy in the caudate and putamen), Tourette disorder (an idiopathic syndrome characterized by motoric and phonic tics that may have a genetic relationship with OCD, see Box 31.7), chronic motor tic disorder, and lesions of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Several of these conditions are associated with complex motor tics (repetitive, coordinated, involuntary movements occurring in patterned sequences in a spontaneous, unpredictable, and transient manner). Complex tics and obsessive thoughts may thus both refl ect aberrant neural processes originating in distinct portions of the corticalstriatal-pallidal-thalamic circuitry that are manifested within the motor and cognitive-behavioral domains, respectively. Compatible with this hypothesis, neurosurgical procedures that interrupt the white matter tracts carrying projections between the frontal lobe, basal ganglia, and thalamus are effective at reducing obsessivecompulsive symptoms in OCD cases that prove intractable to other treatments.Functional neuroimaging studies have also implicated prefrontal cortical-striatal circuits in the pathophysiology of OCD. In primary OCD, "resting" cerebral blood fl ow and metabolism are increased abnormally in the orbitofrontal cortex and the caudate nucleus, and increase further during symptom provocation in these areas, as well as in the putamen, thalamus, and anterior cingulate cortex. During effective pharmacotherapy, orbital metabolism decreases toward normal, and both drug treatment and behavioral therapy are associated with a reduction of caudate metabolism. In contrast, imaging studies of obsessive-compulsive syndromes arising in the setting of Tourette syndrome or basal ganglia lesions have found reduced metabolism in the orbital cortex in such subjects relative to controls. Differences in the functional anatomical correlates of primary versus secondary OCD suggest that dysfunction arising at multiple points within the ventral prefrontal cortical-striatal-pallidal-thalamic circuitry may result in pathological obsessions and compulsions.This circuitry in general appears to be involved in the organization of internally guided behavior toward a reward, switching of response strategies, habit formation, and stereotypic behavior. Electrophysiological and lesion analysis studies indicating that parts of the orbitofrontal cortex specifi cally are involved in the correction of behavioral responses that become inappropriate as reinforcement contingencies change. Such functions could potentially become disturbed at the level of this cortex itself or within the circuits conveying projections from the ventral PFC through the basal ganglia, conceivably giving rise to the perseverative patterns of nonreinforced thought and behavior that characterize the cognitive-behavioral state of OCD. 31. THE BASAL GANGLIAA "tic" is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, stereotyped movement or sound. Individuals with TS exhibit prominent and persistent motor tics and at least one phonic tic, beginning in childhood. Current estimates of TS prevalence range between 0.1 and 1.0%, with a 3.51 male : female ratio. Symptoms wax and wane; roughly half of all TS patients experience a signifi cant symptom decline in their early 20s, whereas others experience lifelong symptoms.Tics differ in complexity (simple, complex) and domain of expression (motor, phonic). In addition to their outward manifestations, a variety of sensory and mental states are associated with tics. "Simple" sensory tics are rapid, recurrent, and stereotyped, and are sensations at or near the skin. "Premonitory urges" are more complex phenomena, which often include both sensory and psychic discomfort that may be momentarily relieved by a tic. The full elaboration of tics, therefore, can include a sequence:(1) a sensory event or premonitory urge, (2) a complex state of inner confl ict over if and when to yield to the urge, (3) the motor or phonic production, and (4) a transient sensation of relief.Functional impairment in TS often results from comorbid conditions. More than 40% of individuals with TS experience symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and a comparable number have symptoms of attentional defi cits and hyperactivity (ADHD).Limited neuropathological evidence suggests four locations of potential pathology within cortico-striatopallido-thalamic (CSPT) circuitry in TS: (1) intrinsic striatal neurons (increased neuronal packing density); (2) diminished striato-pallidal "direct" output (reduced dynorphin-like immunoreactivity in the lenticular nuclei); (3) increased dopaminergic innervation of the striatum (increased density of dopamine transporter sites); and (4) reduced glutamatergic output from the STN (reduced lenticular glutamate content).Volumetric neuroimaging studies report an enlarged corpus callosum, reduced caudate volume, or diminished striatal and lenticular asymmetry; these changes are subtle and are not replicated uniformly. Metabolic neuroimaging studies in TS report a reduced glucose uptake in the orbitofrontal cortex, caudate, parahippocampus, and midbrain regions and reduced blood fl ow in the caudate nucleus, anterior cingulate cortex, and temporal lobes. Regional glucose uptake patterns suggest distributed CSPT dysfunction, based on covariate relationships between reduced glucose uptake in striatal, pallidal, thalamic, and hippocampal regions. Tic suppression is associated with increased right caudate activation, measured by functional MRI, and by bilaterally diminished activity in the putamen, globus pallidus, and thalamus. Neurochemical imaging studies have reported relatively subtle abnormalities in the levels of dopamine receptors, dopamine release, DOPA decarboxylase, and dopamine transporter in the striatum of some individuals with TS. A report of greater caudate D2 receptor binding among more symptomatic TS identical twins may be relevant to factors contributing to heterogeneity of the TS phenotype.There are a number of reported subtle abnormalities in the levels of major neurotransmitters, precursors, metabolites, biogenic amines, and hormones in blood, cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF), and urine of TS subjects compared to controls. One qualitatively different fi nding is that of approximately 40% elevations of serum antiputamen antibodies in TS children. This fi nding may have particular importance, based on growing evidence for autoimmune contributions to at least some forms of TS.Converging evidence for CSPT pathology in TS comes from neuropsychological and psychophysiological studies. Some forms of TS appear to be accompanied by abnormalities in sensorimotor gating, oculomotor functions, and visuospatial priming consistent with mild cortico-striatal dysfunction.The mode of TS inheritance remains elusive. Firstdegree relatives of TS probands are 20-150 times more likely to develop TS compared to unrelated individuals. Concordance rates for TS among monozygotic twins approach 90%, if the phenotypic boundaries include chronic motor or vocal tics, versus 10-25% concordance for dizygotic twins across the same boundaries. One affected sibpair study with a total of 110 sibpairs yielded a multipoint maximum-likelihood scores (MLS) for two regions (4q and 8p) suggestive of high sharing (MLS > 2.0). Four additional regions also gave multipoint MLS scores between 1.0 and 2.0.Treatments for TS focus on education, comorbid conditions, and direct tic suppression. Education is a critically important intervention for both family members and affected individuals. Treatments for comorbid conditions, particularly OCD and ADHD, are highly effective and can provide signifi cant relief. Dopamine antagonists, particularly high potency, D2 preferential blockers, are the BOX 31.7V. MOTOR SYSTEMS most potent and rapid acting tic-suppressing agents, but have important, undesirable side effects. Newer, "atypical" antipsychotics are better tolerated, and some are effective in suppressing tics. The DA depleter tetrabenazine also offers signifi cant tic suppression, but is not yet approved for use in the United States. a 2 -Adrenergic agonists are often used as antitic agents; compared to dopamine antagonists, these drugs have relatively weaker antitic abilities and their benefi t generally evolves more gradually. New therapeutic avenues for TS are being explored in controlled studies, including dopamine agonists such as pergolide, nicotinic manipulations, and Δ 9 -tetrahydro-cannabinol. Intractable, localized tics also have been treated successfully with injections of botulinum toxic. An effective nonpharmacologic therapy, habit reversal therapy, involves the application of cognitive and behavioral therapy principles to TS, analogous to the successful use of these therapies in the treatment of OCD.Cohen, D. J., The cerebellum is a softball-sized structure located at the base of the skull. Grab the back of your head just above where it meets your neck: your hand is now cupped around your cerebellum. As with most brain systems, much of what we know about the cerebellum stems from symptoms of damage or pathology and from its connectivity with the rest of the brain. From such evidence it has long been clear that the cerebellum is an important component of the motor system. Severe abnormalities of movement are produced by pathologies of the cerebellum. Cerebellar outputs infl uence systems that are unambiguously motor, such as the rubro-spinal tract, and inputs to the cerebellum convey information known to be essential for movement such as joint angles and loads on muscles. More recently it has become equally clear that the role of the cerebellum is not limited to movement. This is indicated by its interconnections with nonmotor structures, by the more subtle, nonmotor defi cits seen with cerebellar lesions, and by functional imaging studies where regions of the cerebellum show activation during nonmotor tasks. In moving toward a stronger understanding of the cerebellum one obvious task will be to identify the common aspects or computational demands that these motor and nonmotor functions share.Research on the anatomy, physiology, and function of the cerebellum has been complemented and enhanced by computational approaches that emphasize the rules for input/output transformation and how the cerebellar neurons and synapses implement this transformation. This interdisciplinary approach was made possible by the seminal work of Eccles, Ito, and Szentagothai, who in 1967 published "The cerebellum as a neuronal machine," which described most of the essential aspects of the cellular and synaptic organization of the cerebellum. Soon after, a remarkable paper was published in 1969 by David Marr who inferred some basic computational properties of the cerebellum solely on the basis of the wiring diagram that Eccles and associates had worked out. Since then, the numerous conceptual and practical advantages of working on the cerebellum have enabled a more detailed understanding of what the cerebellum computes and how its neurons and synapses produce this computation.The cerebellum is present in all vertebrates and in the most primitive prevertebrates (myxinoids) up through primates The cerebellum is divided into three lobes The corpus cerebella can be divided into three longitudinal zones (medial, intermediate, and lateral) based on the projection of the cortex onto the three deep nuclei Staining for acetylcholinesterase, zebrin, and other markers reveals strips running sagittally within the longitudinal zone Various attempts have been made to divide the cerebellum according to its functional organization. Fulton and Dow Another scheme based on functional organization arose from cerebellar input mapping studies that revealed a somatotopic map in the anterior lobe of the cerebellum, with trunk in the midline, limbs lateral, tail anterior, and head posterior The three-layered cerebellar cortex contains a highly regular arrangement of seven distinct cell types Granule cell axons ascend radially through the next layer of the cerebellum, the Purkinje cell layer, where the large Purkinje cell somata are located. The ascending granule cell axons make a few synaptic contacts onto Purkinje cells before bifurcating in the outermost molecular layer to form the parallel fi bers (so named because they run parallel to the folia), each of which extends 5 to 10 mm though the cortex and releases glutamate onto the dendritic spines of 2000 to 3000 Purkinje cells The outer molecular layer contains two additional types of inhibitory interneurons, called stellate and basket cells. Both interneuron types are excited by parallel fi bers and form a feed-forward inhibitory circuit by synapsing onto Purkinje cells, whose dendritic arbors extend into the outer molecular layer. Relatively little is known about how the recruitment of these interneurons infl uences Purkinje cell fi ring.The unipolar brush cell is a more recently characterized cerebellar neuron that is found mostly in vestibular regions of the cerebellum The mossy fi ber is the main operational input to the cerebellum, carrying afferent information both from the periphery and from other brain centers Because mossy fi bers originate from second-order sensory neurons, some processing of even the most direct afferent information occurs before that information is sent to the cerebellum. All mossy fi ber input into the cerebellum is excitatory (glutamatergic) The second major type of input to the cerebellum is the climbing fi ber, which arises from the inferior olivary complex located in the brainstem A class of cerebellar afferents with nonlaminar distribution originates in the locus ceruleus, raphe nuclei, and other undefi ned brainstem nuclei. These afferents innervate the deep cerebellar nuclei and all cortical layers, with some preference for the molecular layer. Afferent fi bers from the locus ceruleus release norepinephrine Synapses of nonlaminar afferents have been difficult to defi ne at the electron microscopic level for several reasons Purkinje cell output exclusively targets deep cerebellar and vestibular nucleus neurons. Their GABAergic synapses are specialized for faithful high-frequency response, with large boutons that each contain multiple vesicle release sites, ensuring successful transmission When a Purkinje cell fi res a complex spike in close temporal register with parallel fi ber input, the strength of the parallel fi ber contact onto the Purkinje cell is reduced Cerebellar cell types develop at different times and at different places Once Purkinje, Golgi, basket, and stellate cells have formed, climbing fi bers enter the cerebellum from the inferior olive and begin to innervate the Purkinje cells. Much later, after the Purkinje cells have begun to receive synapses from parallel fi bers, most of the climbing fi ber contacts with Purkinje cells are eliminated. Mossy fi bers also enter the cerebellum and grow to the level just below the Purkinje cell layer. They will ultimately synapse on granule cells, which have yet to arrive.The granule cells fi rst develop at a very distant site, posterior and lateral in the anlagen at the rhombic lip. They then crawl over the Purkinje cells to form an external granule cell layer. Some granule cells may cross the midline to the other side of the cerebellum as they make this migration. The granule cells extend their axons, which branch to form parallel fi bers that run as coronal beams through the dendrites of the Purkinje cells. Only then do the granule cells descend, guided by the Bergmann glia, to form the internal granule cell layer. Each granule cell is connected by the proximal portion of its axon to the branch point of its parallel fi bers, which remain in the external granule cell layer. In the internal granule cell layer, the cell's two to seven dendrites meet the terminals of the mossy fi bers and gradually make connections with them. Connections also are made between granule cells and the intrinsic cortical inhibitory neurons-the Golgi, stellate, and basket cells. It is interesting that the output side of the cerebellar circuit (the deep nuclear I cells and Purkinje cells) forms fi rst, the input side (mossy fi bers) then arrives, and the "matrix" that connects the two (the granule cells and intrinsic inhibitory neurons) is the last to develop.In humans, the fi rst cerebellar structures develop at approximately 32 days after fertilization, and development is not completed until after birth. The cerebellar cortex of the early embryo has six distinct layers, but this number ultimately is reduced to three. The cortex begins to differentiate slightly earlier in the vermis, fl occulus, and median sections of the hemispheres than in the lateral hemispheres. By seven months after fertilization, the deep cerebellar nuclei have attained the shape and location they will have in the adult. At birth, the cerebellar cortex consists of four uneven layers, and the Purkinje cells and basket cells are weakly developed. The fourth layer (the external granule cell layer) disappears within the fi rst postnatal year. In humans, full myelination of cerebellar connections is not complete until the second year of life The cerebellum is a prominent structure in the nervous systems of all vertebrates. The cerebellum ANATOMY AND PHYLOGENETIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE CEREBELLUM 758 32. CEREBELLUM V. MOTOR SYSTEMS receives input from many parts of the nervous system but projects mainly to motor and frontal lobe cognitive areas. This suggests that many different kinds of information are brought together to help control movement and certain cognitive functions. The intrinsic structure is relatively simple and stereotyped throughout the cerebellum, very different from that of the cerebrum. The ontogenetic development is conspicuously late: cell migrations and fi ber connections continue to occur after birth and the development of the rest of the motor nervous system.All the cerebellum's output is produced by the deep cerebellar nuclei and vestibular nuclei. Each deep nucleus has a separate somatotopic representation of the body in which the head, tail, trunk, and extremities are represented in the caudal, rostral, lateral, and medial regions of the nucleus, respectively All cerebellar target structures receive other excitatory inputs in addition to those from the cerebellum. There are no direct projections from the deep nuclei to the basal ganglia In the absence of movement, deep nuclear cells fi re at maintained rates of approximately 40 to 50 Hz The fastigius controls all musculature involved in stance and gait. It receives input from the vermal cortex, vestibular complex, lateral reticular nucleus, and (indirectly) spinocerebellar pathways. Single-unit recordings in the fastigius and vermal cortex of decerebrate cats have shown neural discharge that is correlated with both walking and scratching movements Interpositus neurons fi re when the holding position of a limb is perturbed. In doing so, these neurons appear to control antagonist muscles that check the refl ex movement of the limb to its prior hold position One interpretation of these results is that alternating fi ring in Purkinje cells creates (through inhibition) a similar pattern of activity the interpositus cells, which in turn produces the alternation between agonist and antagonist muscles. Other work suggests that the interpositus contributes to stretch refl ex excitability by controlling the discharge of gamma motor neurons Neuronal activity in the dentate precedes the onset of movement and may also precede fi ring in the motor cortex Ablations of the fastigius in cat and monkey dramatically impair movements requiring control of equilibrium, such as unsupported sitting, stance, and gait Ablations of the interpositus in monkeys primarily cause tremor Ablations of the dentate nucleus in monkeys produce slight reaction time delays, poor endpoint control, and impaired multijointed movements far beyond any defi cits found in single-jointed movements. In several studies, lesions of the dentate produced very slight delays in the onset of motor cortex cell activity Damage to the cerebellar cortex causes disability similar to but less severe than that resulting from damage to the deep nuclei. Damage to the cortex and the inferior olive also prevents many kinds of motor adaptation, including the acquisition of new and novel muscle synergies.The relationship between cerebellar somatotopic maps and parallel fi ber morphology is consistent with a cerebellar role in movement coordination. In Anatomical studies indicate that parallel fi bers in the monkey are about 6 mm long Parallel fi ber beams can also serve to link activity in different deep cerebellar nuclei. A link occurring across the two fastigial nuclei would effectively couple the two sides of the body in stance and gait. A link across the fastigius and interpositus would couple locomotion and refl ex sensitivity. A link across the interpositus and dentate would couple reach and refl ex sensitivity. In a recent study in trained reaching rats What is the consequence of the on-beam synchronicity? Parallel fi bers in the cerebellar cortex run roughly parallel to the myotomes of the body maps in the deep nuclei. On-beam parallel fi ber activity may thus recruit Purkinje cell inhibition to modulate coordination and timing of the natural myomeric synergists mapped within the deep nuclei. In addition, parallel fi bers would be long enough to span (via Purkinje cell projections) two or more adjacent nuclei, fastigius controlling stance and gait, interpositus agonist/antagonist coordination at a single joint, and dentate eye-limb coordination in reaching and of digits in multidigit movements Given its tonic excitatory effect on motor pattern generators in the vestibular nuclei, reticular nuclei, and the motor cortex, the cerebellum may be responsible for tuning these structures so that they respond optimally to noncerebellar inputs. Luciani championed the idea of a reinforcing tone with his interpretation of the behavioral defi cits produced by cerebellar ablation in animals, a principal component of which was atonia. Holmes endorsed this interpretation based on his own analysis of behavioral defi cits in human subjects with cerebellar lesions Numerous investigators have proposed that the cerebellum performs a pure timing function. Braitenberg and colleagues Several models of cerebellar function incorporate linear systems principles The combiner-coordinator model proposes that the role of the cerebellum is to coordinate movements According to the Marr-Ito motor learning hypothesis For many years the cerebellum was thought to be involved only or mostly in the control and adaptability of movement. This notion was based on the profound motor defi cits seen in cerebellar patients and on the fact that cerebellar projections had been traced only to motor areas. Recently, however, this view of the cerebellum has changed Initial suggestions that the cerebellum participates in cognition arose from anatomic connections that were thought to exist due to the parallel expansion of the frontal lobe, lateral cerebellum, and dentate Human brain imaging studies indicate that the cerebellum participates in some types of cognitive functions. One study revealed cerebellar activation when subjects imagined or passively observed movement without moving themselves Behavioral observations of humans with cerebellar damage have also provided evidence that the cerebellum participates in nonmotor aspects of cognition. In one case study, a cerebellar patient was unable to detect errors in a verb-generating task and did not exhibit normal practice-related learning, although the patient performed normally on standard intelligence and memory tests Clinical investigations of adults and children with diseases confi ned to the cerebellum have defi ned a cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome characterized by impairments of executive processing, working memory, visual spatial reasoning, language disturbances (ranging from autism to agrammatism), and a fl attened or inappropriate affect. The net effect of these defi cits is a lowering of overall intellectual ability. The posterior lobe of the cerebellum appears particularly important in generating the defi cits, and the vermis is consistently involved when the affective component is pronounced. Elements of this clinical syndrome have also been noted in patients with developmental cerebellar anomalies, cerebellar degeneration, autism, and fragile X syndrome. In addition, cerebellar There is now little question that the cerebellum projects to many areas of cerebral cortex outside of primary motor cortex, and that many of these areas are known to have cognitive as well as motor functions, however it remains to be seen whether the cerebellum targets the "cognitive" functions of these areas and not the "motor." The studies of Schmahman and Sherman (1998), for example, include a wide variety of types of mental disturbance and of cerebellar location. In proposing that there is indeed a "cognitive affective cerebellar syndrome," one would like to be assured that there is indeed a "syndrome"-that is, a constellation of behavioral and anatomic features that consistently and reliably "run together." The studies of Courchesne and associates, which document the attention defi cits and the focal cerebellar atrophy in autism, do seem to constitute a syndrome Since there is no consensus that focal cerebellar lesions in previously normal individuals consistently produce such a syndrome, one may be skeptical that the atrophy in autism produces the disorder of mentation as well as that of movement. Similarly for work on schizophrenia, which has documented a common association of focal cerebellar atrophy Eye movements are also differentially controlled by specifi c parts of the cerebellum (Chapter 33). The vestibular nuclei and the vestibulocerebellum control the vestibulo-ocular and optokinetic refl exes (VOR and OKR, respectively) and participate in smooth pursuit eye movements. The cerebellar cortex is necessary for visual smooth-pursuit tracking, which requires VOR cancellation. The interpositus and intermediate cerebellar cortex participate in conditioned eye-blink. The dentate and lateral cerebellar cortex are involved in voluntary gaze, saccades, and eye-hand coordination (see In the early 1900s, Gordon Holmes carefully described the movement defi cits associated with discrete cerebellar lesions caused by gunshot wounds Ataxia is a condition that involves lack of coordination between movements of body parts. The term often is used in reference to gait or movement of a specifi c body part, as in "ataxic arm movements." Dysmetria is an inability to make a movement of the appropriate distance. Hypometria is undershooting a target, and hypermetria is overshooting a target. Patients with cerebellar damage tend to make hypermetric movements when they move rapidly and hypometric movements when they move more slowly and wish to be accurate. Dysdiadochokinesia is an inability to make rapidly alternating movements of a limb. It appears to refl ect abnormal agonist-antagonist control. Asynergia is an inability to combine the movements of individual limb segments into a coordinated, multisegmental movement. Hypotonia is an abnormally decreased muscle tone.It is manifest as a decreased resistance to passive movement, so that a limb swings freely upon external perturbation. Hypotonia often is limited to the acute phase of cerebellar disease. Nystagmus is an involuntary and rhythmic eye movement that usually consists of a slow and a fast phase. In an unilateral cerebellar lesion, the fast phase of nystagmus is toward the side of the lesion. Action tremor, or intention tremor, is an involuntary oscillation that occurs during limb movement and disappears when the limb is at rest. Cerebellar action tremor is generally of high amplitude and low frequency (3-5 Hz). Titubation is a tremor of the entire trunk during stance and gait. Lesions of cerebellar target structures (e.g., the red nucleus and the thalamus) often result in cerebellar outfl ow tremor, or postural tremor. Most prominent when a limb is actively held in a static posture, postural tremor attenuates during limb movement and disappears when the limb is at rest.Ataxia of stance and gait can result from a loss of equilibrium and vestibular refl exes produced by lesions of the vestibular nuclei and vestibulocerebellum. Abnormal synergies during standing and walking 766 32. CEREBELLUM V. MOTOR SYSTEMS FIGURE 32.8 (A) Single trials of the torques produced by one control subject and two cerebellar subjects, all moving in the fast-accurate condition. One cerebellar subject (mild) produced mildly abnormal reaches by kinematic measures. The other cerebellar subject (severe) produced reaches that were profoundly abnormal by kinematic measures. The torques produced by the control subject and the mildly impaired cerebellar subject were similar, although the mildly impaired cerebellar subject's elbow and shoulder net torques (bold lines) more closely followed the dynamic interaction torque (small dotted lines). The severely impaired cerebellar subject produced torques that were abnormal, with the net elbow and shoulder torques (bold line) closely following the dynamic interaction torque at the respective joints (small dotted line). (B) The wrist and index fi nger paths are shown moving toward the target (large dot) for the same trials as in A. The control subject makes straight line wrist and index paths and stops right on the target (bold circle). One cerebellar subject (mild) produced slightly curved wrist and index paths and stopped on target. The other cerebellar subject (severe) produced curved wrist and index paths and overshot the target by a great extent. Adapted from Action tremor probably is caused by instability of stretch refl exes, due to an inability to adjust the gain and sensitivity of the refl exes. Dysdiadochokinesis may be due to a failure to coordinate the activation of a muscle with the inhibition of its antagonists and antagonistic stretch refl exes. Damage to the interpositus, alone or in combination with damage to the dentate, is speculated to cause this defi cit.Asynergy of voluntary movements is thought to result mostly from damage to the dentate and the lateral cerebellar cortex, because loss of the dentate signifi cantly impairs the coordination of multijointed movements but has much less effect on single-jointed movements It has been proposed that a major function of the lateral cerebellum is to generate predictive and feedback corrections that are used to compensate for extraneous forces generated by one's own body movements. Lesions of the lateral cerebellum also produce modest increases in voluntary reaction time. This defect may refl ect the loss of the early cerebellar signals that generate movements. Cerebellar damage can also result in the loss of adjustability of movement. Studies of prism adaptation have shown that some patients with cerebellar damage are unable to adjust their hand-eye coordination appropriately A series of patients sustained infarct of the left cerebral cortical frontal speech area with immediate onset of aphasia. After time and speech training, they recovered the ability to speak. FMRI study showed that upon speaking, symmetrically opposite portions of the opposite right cerebral hemisphere were active. Further, the regions of the cerebellum now active in speech had shifted to the left cerebellar hemisphere. This suggests that (1) the primary property of the cerebellar hemispheres is not speech (right) or spatial operations (left), but rather (2) their cooperation/training of the opposite cerebral hemisphere cortex, whatever activities it is engaged in An ongoing series of studies is exploring this potential role in neurorehabilitation of gait after hemiplegia due to cerebral hemispheric cortical infarcts or hemispherectomy for seizure control. Subjects repeatedly walk on a split treadbelt. The belt on the defective side can be made to move faster to bring gait in the impaired leg up to match that on the normal side. This training appears to carry over to over ground gait for a period of time. Further studies will determine whether additional intensive training can induce a permanent learning effect, as in the prism gaze-arm throwing experiments.The preceding sections illustrate that the contributions of the cerebellum are diverse and that there are a variety of ideas about the function of the cerebellum that at the surface appear somewhat mutually exclusive. Presumably however, what these contributions share is the computation that the cerebellum accomplishes-that is, the rules that describe the transformation of inputs to outputs. Like all brain systems, the cerebellum receives inputs from other parts of the brain, acts on these inputs with rules determined by its connectivity and synaptic/cellular properties, and produces output to other brain systems. Understanding the cerebellum, or any brain system, thus involves accomplishing three interrelated goals:1. What the cerebellum computes, which involves a thorough characterization of the rules for input/ output transformation. In essence, this goal states that we understand the cerebellum when given an input to it (and information about past history) we can reliably predict the output. 2. How the cerebellum computes, which means to understand the interactions between synaptic organization and synaptic physiology that mediates the input/output transformations. 3. Why the cerebellum is involved in various aspects of behavior should then be derivable from their common need for the computation that the cerebellum accomplishes.In this section we outline progress toward these goals. We will limit discussion to research related to the motor function of the cerebellum, mainly because movement is inherently more experimentally tractable than cognition. Thus, much more is known about the cerebellar computations that are applied to motor coordination. Given that the synaptic organization of the cerebellum is relatively uniform it is likely that the same computational principles apply qualitatively for cerebellar regions involved in cognitive functions.For cerebellar contributions to the motor system, three functions generally dominate discussion: (1) motor coordination, which is an obvious inference given the severe motor defi cits described earlier; (2) motor learning, which is inferred from cerebellar involvement in several experimentally tractable forms of motor learning (Pavlovian eyelid conditioning, adaption of the VOR, adaptation of saccades and learning of smooth pursuit eye movements to name four); and (3) timing, which is suggested by timing-related defi cits in cerebellar patients, functional imaging in humans, and by certain rhythmic properties of cerebellar neurons. This list is not complete, but it can serve as an illustration of how a focus on cerebellar computation can tie together many, if not all of the functions that have been proposed for the cerebellum. From analysis of the input/output transformations of the cerebellum enabled largely by analysis of eyelid conditioning, this computation appears to be feedforward prediction. Thus, motor coordination is enhanced by cerebellar feed-forward prediction, which requires associative learning with timing In principle there are two ways to make use of sensory input to make decisions about output: feedback and feed-forward. Feedback is familiar and simple-a thermostat is an example of feedback. The measured temperature (sensory input) is compared to a target and differences are translated into turning on the heater or cooler. Feedback systems of this sort can be accurate and reliable, but they cannot be fast. Attempts to make a feedback system fast result in oscillations as, in the thermostat example, small deviations from the target produce alternating activations of the heater and cooler as each output causes overshoot of the target temperature ( If, after producing its response, the wrong outcome is detected, then the feed-forward thermostat should learn from this mistake so that subsequent predictions FIGURE 32.9 This is from 1. The learning should be associative: it should modify only the future output of the system for inputs that are similar to the ones that were present just before the error. 2. The learning should show temporal fl exibility: the learned changes in output should not be time locked to the onset of any given mossy fi ber input, but should be delayed after their onset so that the changed responses fi x the errant prediction-namely, the one that occurred just before the arrival of the error signal. In other words, the error signal should fi x the output that just occurred, not the output present at the onset of the mossy fi ber inputs that preceded and predicted the error.Eyelid conditioning studies reveal precisely these properties in cerebellar learning. It is associative in that it takes mossy fi ber inputs predicting climbing fi ber inputs to occur. Moreover, the timing of the responses is precisely as described earlier.Pairing a mossy fi ber input with a climbing fi ber input produces a change in cerebellar output that is not time locked to the onset of the mossy fi ber input, but is instead timed to peak just before the time when the climbing fi ber input arrives. This shows that cerebellar learning can develop predictions, through trial and error learning with climbing fi ber error signals, that improve the prediction about the proper cerebellar output for a given mossy fi ber input.This may tie together many key ideas about cerebellar function. Motor coordination is improved by feed-forward learning feed-forward predictions. This learning requires associative learning with quite specifi c temporal properties. It requires motor learning with timing. An interesting challenge for the future will be to determine how feed-forward prediction can contribute to the various cognitive processes that appear to engage the cerebellum. The most important information that currently is lacking is what activates the climbing fi ber (error) inputs for regions of the cerebellum involved in cognition and how do learned changes in output contribute to or improve cognitive processes?Ideas about cerebellar function have been driven largely by the effects of lesion or dysfunction of the cerebellum and by the anatomical and physiological properties of cerebellar inputs, outputs, and intrinsic circuitry. This has led to a wide variety of models of cerebellar function and to debates about whether it is a motor structure, a sensory structure, or a cognitive structure. A view of cerebellar function that incorporates cerebellar computations may be more informative and may also help us understand how the various theories of cerebellum function are interrelated.Several genetic mutations in mice perturb the normal development of the cerebellum. In the weaver mutation, granule cells (and thus parallel fi bers) are absent, causing Purkinje cells to develop abnormally organized dendrites with an excessive number of spines. The reeler mutation causes Purkinje cells to migrate abnormally, resulting in a large displacement of Purkinje cells within the central cerebellar mass. In the staggerer mutation, most Purkinje cells are absent before granule cell migration, while in the nervous mutation, Purkinje cells begin to develop normally but then degenerate after most synaptic connections with parallel fi bers have been formed. Studies of these and other mutations that cause specifi c cellular components to be deleted at different developmental stages are furthering our understanding of the complex cellular interactions that take place during normal synaptogenesis.It no longer seems reasonable to consider the function of the cerebellum as being confi ned to the control of voluntary movement, speech, and equilibrium. Considerable evidence suggests that the cerebellum is critical also for thought, behavior, and emotion. Anatomical studies demonstrate that the cerebellum is an important part of the distributed neural circuitry that subserves cognitive processing. The association and paralimbic cerebral cortices known to subserve higher order functions are linked with the cerebellum in a precisely organized system of feed forward and feedback loops, and physiological studies indicate that these pathways are functionally relevant. Cerebellar ablation and stimulation experiments in animals have demonstrated cerebellar infl uences on many nonmotor functions, including classical conditioning, navigational skills, cognitive fl exibility, sham range, predatory attack, and aggression. Functional neuroimaging investigations of the morphologic correlates of cognitive processing using PET and fMRI in humans have revealed sites of activation in the cerebellum in a number of cognitive tasks. These include linguistic processing, verbal working memory, shifting attention, mental imagery, classical conditioning, motor learning, sensory processing, and modulation of emotion. Furthermore, there appears to be a topographic organization of the sites within the cerebellum activated by these different cognitive processes.Clinical investigations of adults and children with diseases confi ned to the cerebellum have defi ned a cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome characterized by impairments of executive processing, working memory, visual spatial reasoning, language disturbances (ranging from mutism to agrammatism), and a fl attened or inappropriate affect. The net effect of these defi cits is a lowering of overall intellectual ability. The posterior lobe of the cerebellum appears particularly important in the generation of this syndrome, and the vermis is consistently involved when the affective component is pronounced. Elements of this clinical syndrome have also been noted in patients with developmental cerebellar anomalies, cerebellar degeneration, autism, and fragile X syndrome. In addition, cerebellar abnormalities, particularly in the vermis, have been observed in patients with schizophrenia.The mechanisms whereby the cerebellum infl uences higher function are still debated. The organization of the cerebellar corticonuclear microcomplex and the interactions between the mossy and climbing fi ber systems prompted the hypothesis that the cerebellum provides an error detection mechanism for the motor system. This mechanism may also be relevant for mental operations.The relationship between the cerebellum and nonmotor function has been conceptualized as follows.1. The cerebellum is able to subserve cognitive functions because it is anatomically interconnected with the associative and paralimbic cortices. 2. Cognitive and behavioral functions are organized topographically within the cerebellum. 3. The convergence of inputs from multiple associative cerebral regions to adjacent areas within the cerebellum facilitates cerebellar regulation of supramodal functions. 4. The cerebellar contribution to cognition is one of modulation rather than generation. 5. The cerebellum performs computations for cognitive functions similar to those for the sensorimotor system -but the information being modulated is different. 6. The disruption of the cerebellar infl uences on higher functions leads to dysmetria of thought, impairment of mental agility that manifests, at least in part, as the cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome.The potential for further discovery in this fi eld places the cerebellum, previously thought of as a motor control device, in the forefront of current behavioral neuroscience research. As we learned in Chapter 27, the photoreceptor mosaic of the vertebrate retina transduces light energy in the form of photons into neural activity, ultimately in the form of action potentials. The spatial resolution of this transduction system is limited by the mosaic of photoreceptors and the optics of the eye, but only if the eye is held stationary with respect to the objects of interest in the external world. Thus, stabilizing the eyes with regard to the outside world and aiming the eyes toward moving or stationary targets are critical challenges to effective vision. Evolutionary pressures have shaped the eye movement systems of animals to meet this challenge in ways that are tailored to the visual structures and behavioral needs of each species. In this chapter we examine the behavioral and neural systems used by vertebrates to control eye movements in the support of vision.As we shall see, the control of eye movements provides a window into several fundamental aspects of neuroscience. Because the eyes are a relatively simple mechanical system, eye movements provide an excellent system for investigating the neural mechanisms of motor control, and also offer some of the clearest views of other complex processes, such as neural plasticity, sensory-motor interactions, and the higher-order control of behavior.Similar to the handling of a camera, the images that fall on the retina depend on how the eyes are held and moved. The orientation of the eyes in the head and the orientation and position of the head in space together determine the gaze direction (i.e., gaze = eye + head) and, consequently, control the retinal image. These spatial arrangements underlie the two general classes of eye movements in vertebrates. One class is responsible for gaze stabilization. When animals move with respect to their surroundings, they risk degrading their visual acuity, because moving the head necessarily moves the eyes, and can cause images to streak across the retina. Gaze stabilization mechanisms have evolved to solve this problem. They maintain visual acuity during self-motion by stabilizing the retinal image of the world with rotations of the eyes that exactly compensate for head and body movements. The neural mechanisms for gaze stabilization are highly conserved across vertebrates, refl ecting the widespread need to stabilize visual inputs despite other sensory and motor differences between species.The second class is responsible for gaze shifting. When animals visually inspect their surroundings, they may use these eye movements to direct the line of sight to objects or features of particular interest, even when those items move. In contrast to stabilization mechanisms, gaze shifting mechanisms involve selectively sampling the animal's visual environment, because tracking one visual object often causes the retinal images of other objects to become blurred. Accordingly, the mechanisms for gaze shifting are found only in animals that have retinal specializations, such as the primate fovea, that can be used to examine a limited region of visual space at a higher spatial resolution.There are two types of mechanisms for stabilizing gaze The optokinetic response (OKR) is driven by visual signals about the en masse movement of images across the retina. Because of the slow transduction of visual signals, the OKR has a longer latency (50-100 ms) than the VOR, but the use of visual motion signals makes it able to compensate for the constant motions and low speeds that the VOR cannot. The properties of the OKR therefore complement those of the VOR in maintaining stable gaze during movements, and the visual signals used by the OKR play a major role in guiding adaptive changes in the VOR. Animals with foveal vision also possess an ocular following response that is driven at very short latencies (∼50 ms) by shifts in the retinal image, and that serves as the visual complement to the translational VOR Animals with foveal vision also possess several mechanisms for shifting gaze Smooth pursuit eye movements slowly rotate the eyes to compensate for any motion of the visual target, and thus act to minimize the blurring of the target's retinal image that would otherwise occur. Smooth pursuit is a relatively slow movement whose trajectory is determined by the moving stimulus. Pursuit is triggered by visual stimuli at latencies similar to, but somewhat shorter than, the latencies of saccades (typically 100-200 ms), and generates eye velocities up to ∼50 deg/s, continuously adjusted by visual feedback about the target's retinal image. Unlike saccades, FIGURE 33.1 Eye movements that stabilize gaze. The vestibulo-ocular refl ex keeps the line of sight fi xed in the world by counter-rotating the eyes during movements of the head. Here, the eyes rotate rightward at a short latency after the beginning of the leftward head movement. The optokinetic response stabilizes the line of sight with respect to the moving visual surround, but does so after a longer latency.pursuit cannot be generated in the absence of a stimulus, although moving targets that are sensed through modalities other than vision can also guide pursuit.Saccades and smooth pursuit produce conjugate, or yoked, movements of the two eyes. These are also referred to as versional eye movements. In contrast, a third type of mechanism for shifting gaze, called vergence eye movements, produces disconjugate movements-the two eyes move in opposite directions or by different amounts. Vergence eye movements act to change the depth at which the eyes' lines of sight meet. When we look at a near object our eyes converge (rotate inward), and when we look at a far object our eyes diverge (rotate outward). Before shifting our gaze to an object at a different distance, the pair of images produced by that object will be spatially mismatched between the two eyes, causing binocular disparity. Also, because the curvature of the two eyes' lenses are set to focus the currently viewed object, the image of the new object will also be blurred. These two signals, binocular disparity and blur, drive the combination of vergence eye movements and accommodation (which changes the dioptric power of the lenses by contracting or relaxing the ciliary muscle) that bring the new object into focus on the fovea of both eyes. Vergence and accommodation are tightly linked and often are referred together as the near response. When evoked by themselves (e.g., by binocular disparity), vergence movements are very slow, taking up to 1 second to converge or diverge the eyes. However, when they occur in combination with faster versional eye movements such as saccades, vergence movements speed up, and interestingly, so does accommodation.In between gaze shifts, the eyes are actively held steady by a fi xation mechanism. By preventing the eyes from shifting gaze to another visual target, fi xation makes it possible to visually inspect a particular object at length. Periods of fi xation typically last about 200 ms, but vary depending on what the animal is doing. Fixation does not necessarily act to keep the eyes from moving, but to hold the eyes steady with respect to the environment. For example, gaze stabilization mechanisms such as the VOR are active during periods of fi xation.Even during periods of steady fi xation of a stationary object, the eyes are not completely still. The eyes typically make tiny movements during fi xation in seemingly random directions that cause very slight changes in how images fall on the retinal mosaic but without displacing images from the fovea. Microsaccades are very small saccades with amplitudes typically less than 0.1 degree of visual angle, and often are interspersed with slow drifts (speeds less than ¼ degree per second) of similar amplitude. The function of these movements remains unclear. They may  prevent the adaptation of retinal signals that would occur with perfectly stabilized images, but the frequency of these small movements is in fact reduced during tasks that place high demands on foveal vision, such as threading a needle.Moving the eye involves rotating the globe of the eye in the orbital socket of the skull. Because the eye undergoes minimal translation during movement, it can be viewed as a spherical joint with an orientation defi ned by three axes of rotation The mechanics of moving the eye may seem simple, but the details are quite complicated. Because the eye is free to rotate in three dimensions, the fi nal orientation of the eye depends on the order in which the rotations are carried out; for example, "turn-then-spin" gives a different outcome than "spin-then-turn." This property is referred to as noncommutativity. In fact, when the eye moves, the fi nal three-dimensional orientation of the eye and the axis of rotation used to get there are not arbitrary, but form an orderly set. Donder's law states that the orientation of the eye is always the same when the eye is aimed in a particular direction. Listing's law specifi es these orientations by stating that the axes used to rotate the eye are confi ned to a single plane, referred to as Listing's plane. These orderly relationships are achieved, at least in part, by a mechanism that involves the muscles themselves. The extraocular muscles consist of two distinct layers: global fi bers, which attach directly to the globe of the eye, and orbital fi bers, which terminate in connective tissue that ensheathes the body of the muscle and acts like a moveable pulley for the global fi bers. Because the pulleys themselves move when the muscle is contracted or relaxed, the pulling direction of the extraocular muscles changes with eye position. These gaze-dependent mechanical changes in muscle action largely account for Listing's law The six extraocular muscles are innervated by three of the bilaterally paired cranial nerves The fi ring rates of the oculomotor motor neurons determine the forces applied by the extraocular muscles and, consequently, whether the eye moves or is held in place The neural commands from these motor neurons therefore take the form of a pulse-step during rapid eye movements such as saccades. The amplitude and duration of the pulse determine the speed and duration of the movement, and the amplitude of the step determines the fi nal static eye position. The need for the pulse derives from the sluggish dynamics of the FIGURE 33.4 Oculomotor nuclei in the brainstem. Parasagittal section through the brainstem, cerebellum, and thalamus of a rhesus monkey, showing the location of the major brainstem nuclei involved in the control of eye movements. Motor neurons for the eye muscles are located in the oculomotor nucleus (III), trochlear nucleus (IV), and abducens nucleus (VI), and reach the extraocular muscles via the corresponding nerves (n. III, n. IV, n. VI). Premotor neurons for controlling eye movements are located in the paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF), the mesencephalic reticular formation (MRF), rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (riMLF), the interstitial nucleus of Cajal (IC), the vestibular nuclei (VN), and the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi (NPH). The medial longitudinal fasciculus (mlf) is a major fi ber tract containing the axons of these neurons. Other abbreviation: MB, mammillary body of the hypothalamus. eye and orbital tissues, which is dominated by the viscosity of the extraocular muscles. If the eye were moved by only a step change in force, it would take nearly a second for the eye to settle at its new orientation, which would obviously be incompatible with the goal of supporting vision. Similarly, during slow eye movements such as smooth pursuit, the neural commands from the motor neurons consist of a ramp-like change in activity to drive the smooth changes in eye position, plus an additional increment to overcome the sluggish dynamics of the eye. These patterns of activity are adjusted precisely by central mechanisms involving the brain stem and cerebellum, and illustrate a general problem in motor control-the need to convert desired actions into appropriately formed motor commands. The solution appears to involve the use of internal models that allow central mechanisms to take into account the dynamic properties of the body part or object to be moved.Oculomotor motor units are also unusual in several ways The function of the VOR is to stabilize retinal images during head movements by using head-motion signals from the vestibular organs. A purely rotational VOR can be elicited in complete darkness by rotating the head roughly about its center (e.g., the interaural axis). Head rotations stimulate the semicircular canals of the inner ear, which provide the sensory signals about head motion that drive this highly conserved mechanisms for counter-rotating the eyes. During sustained rotations of the head, the eyes cannot continue to counter-rotate endlessly in the orbit, but are intermittently and rapidly reset to a central position during the ongoing compensatory eye rotation. The profi le of eye position over time during the VOR therefore exhibits a characteristic saw-tooth pattern consisting of the slow-phase counter-rotations and quick-phase resetting eye movements. This pattern is called nystagmus, and is described by the direction of the quick phases The speed of the slow phases during nystagmus indicates how effectively the VOR is compensating for FIGURE 33.5 The fi ring rate patterns of eye movement motor neurons during horizontal eye movements. The rapid rightward change in eye position, indicted by the upward defl ection in the eye position trace, involves contraction of the right lateral rectus and relaxation of the right medial rectus. This is accomplished by a pulse-step increase in activity of the agonist motor neurons in the abducens nucleus, and a pause-step decrease in activity of the antagonist motor neurons in the oculomotor nucleus.the head rotation. The degree of compensation often is characterized by the VOR gain, which is defi ned as the ratio of slow-phase eye speed over the speed of head rotation. Perfect compensation occurs when the eye rotates in the opposite direction at exactly the same speed as the head rotation, which corresponds to a gain of 1. The ability of the VOR to compensate for head motion is limited by the dynamics of the signals from the semicircular canals, which act as "high-pass" sensors of head velocity. Thus, the VOR is very effective (its gain is near 1) for fast back-and-forth head rotations that take a second or less to complete (i.e., frequencies over 1 Hz), but it is much less effective for slow head rotations that continue over many seconds (e.g., 0.1 Hz). Under natural conditions, this limitation of the VOR does not pose a problem for vision, because at these lower speeds visual signals can be used to stabilize gaze very effectively through the optokinetic response.The fundamental neural mechanism for the VOR consists of brain stem circuits linking the vestibular afferents to the extraocular muscles, including a direct 3-neuron arc pathway These direct pathways are key components of the VOR mechanism, but the VOR also requires indirect pathways to function correctly. As discussed in the previous section, the fi ring rate of oculomotor motor neurons is related primarily to eye position, but the afferent signals from the semicircular canals are related primarily to the head velocity. In order to construct the motor commands needed to hold, as well as move, the eyes during the VOR, the brain needs to transform the dynamic signals provided by the vestibular afferents into the combination of dynamic and static commands found on motor neurons. Similar to the operation of mathematical integration in calculus, this process involves the temporal integration of velocity inputs into position signals.The eye movements and neural circuits for the VOR. During a sustained rotation of the head (here, rightward), the eyes rotate slowly to the left (downward defl ections in eye position trace labeled "slow phases"), and then abruptly shift rightward to reset the eyes toward a central position (upward defl ections in eye position trace labeled "quick phases"). This is an example of right-beat nystagmus. The diagram of the basic VOR circuit shows the push-pull organization of the horizontal VOR. When the head rotates rightward, activity increases in the right semicircular canal, right vestibular nucleus (VN), and left abducens nucleus (VI). This leads to increased activation of the left eye lateral rectus and, through a crossed projection to the oculomotor nucleus (III), increased activation of the right eye medial rectus. The complementary set of pathways (colored in gray) show decreases in activity.The neural integrator for eye movements is accomplished by neurons in the vestibular nuclei and two other brain stem nuclei-the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi (for horizontal components) and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal (for vertical)-and is fi ne-tuned by connections between these brain stem nuclei and the vestibulocerebellum The OKR also functions to stabilize retinal images during head movements, but uses visual inputs to infer the direction and speed of head motion rather than responding directly to head-velocity signals. The optimal stimulus for the OKR is full-fi eld motion of the visual environment that, like head rotations, causes a saw-tooth pattern of eye movements referred to as optokinetic nystagmus. Like the VOR, the slow phase movements during nystagmus compensate for the head rotation that presumably caused the full-fi eld motion. However, because the OKR is driven by visual signals, which are processed much more slowly than vestibular signals, the range of motions that are effectively compensated by the OKR is quite different from the VOR. The OKR is very effective (its gain is near 1) for slow rotations that continue over many seconds, but it is much less effective for very fast back-and-forth rotations. These properties of the OKR therefore complement those of the VOR and together, the two types of mechanisms can effectively stabilize gaze over a much wider range of speeds and behavioral conditions than either could achieve alone.The interlocking nature of the two systems is also evident in the neural pathways for the OKR, despite the difference in their input signals. In vertebrate species without foveal vision, such as the rabbit, the visual processing for the OKR is accomplished entirely within the brain stem. Direction-selective retinal ganglion cells project directly to a set of visual nuclei in the midbrain called the pretectum and accessory optic nuclei. In species with foveal vision, the visual properties of these nuclei are determined not only by inputs from the retina, but also are shaped by inputs from visual areas of the cerebral cortex. Neurons in the accessory optic nuclei have very large receptive fi elds and respond selectively to global visual motion that would result from rotating the head about a particular spatial axis. Remarkably, the selectivity of individual neurons is restricted to one of the three axes of rotation that are also detected by the semicircular canals. This common rotational coordinate system makes it easier to combine visual reafferent signals about head motion from the accessory optic nuclei with the vestibular afferent signals provided by the labyrinths. Accordingly, neurons in the pretectum and accessory optic nuclei project to the vestibular nuclei and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi, where these visual signals join the same fi nal pathways used by the VOR. These nuclei also project to the vestibulocerebellum, where the visual signals contribute to the velocity commands for the OKR and other smooth eye movements, and also act as feedback signals that play a critical role in the long-term adjustment of the VOR.The commands for shifting gaze use the same fi nal motor pathways that are used for stabilizing gaze, but the signals and mechanisms giving rise to the gazeshifting commands are quite different. For smooth pursuit, they are based on motion signals about the visual target that are fi rst extracted in specialized areas of the cerebral cortex and then used to commandeer the brain stem and cerebellar pathways for the OKR. For saccades, which are not guided by visual feedback, a specialized circuit in the brain stem reticular formation produces the stereotyped velocity command that determines the trajectory of the saccade.The control signals for saccades descending from higher centers specify the location of the target, which is then transformed by circuits in the brain stem reticular formation into the motor commands for saccades Within these brain stem circuits, often referred to as the saccadic burst generator, several different classes of neurons work together to construct the saccade motor command The other major class of neurons in the saccadic burst generator are the omnipause neurons (OPNs). These neurons fi re at a constant high rate (∼100 spikes/s) during fi xation, but completely pause their activity just before and during saccades in all directions. Because the OPNs directly inhibit both EBNs and IBNs, their tonic activity prevents unwanted saccades during fi xation, and the pause in their activity unleashes the synchronized bursts of action potentials that initiate and drive the saccade. The onset of the pause in OPN activity appears to be triggered by inhibitory signals originating from higher brain centers, but the duration of the pause does not determine when the saccade ends. Instead, stopping saccades involves another inhibitory infl uence on burst neurons. One likely candidate is the oculomotor cerebellum (lobules VI and VII of the vermis and the caudal fastigial nucleus). The oculomotor vermis is interconnected with the saccadic burst generator and plays a crucial role in adjusting the metrics of saccades so that the eyes land accurately on the target at the end of the gaze shift.The control signals for pursuit descending from higher centers continuously specify the motion of the target to be followed with the eyes. Thus, in contrast to saccades, pursuit does not require motor circuitry to construct the velocity command from scratch. Instead, the pursuit pathways in the brain stem and cerebellum sculpt the descending control signals to form an appropriately shaped velocity command, and provide a copy of this velocity signal to the neural integrator to generate the position component of the motor command.  The velocity commands for pursuit arise in areas of the cerebral cortex and reach the fi nal motor circuits through several routes Another route for conveying motion signals for pursuit involves the pretectum. As described earlier, the pretectum plays a key role in the OKR, but in primates the pretectum receives inputs from areas of the cerebral cortex that are important for pursuit. Accordingly, some neurons in the primate pretectum have smaller receptive fi elds and respond well to the small moving stimuli typically used to elicit pursuit. The pretectum provides an input to the cerebellum through the basal pontine nuclei, but also projects directly to the vestibular nuclei and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi, offering a relatively direct route to the fi nal motor pathways. The brain stem control of pursuit also appears to involve some of the same neurons that are part of the saccadic burst generator. The EBNs and IBNs are not involved in forming the pursuit motor command, but some of the long-lead burst neurons in the brain stem reticular formation increase their tonic fi ring during pursuit, and show a build-up of activity before the onset of pursuit and saccades. Even more surprisingly, OPNs-the "gatekeepers" for saccades-are also modulated during pursuit. They do not completely pause their activity as they do during saccades, but decrease their activity by about one-third. Moreover, electrical stimulation applied to the OPNs slows down pursuit eye movements, in addition to stopping saccades information about the target does not directly trigger saccades and pursuit, but instead a motor decision process at the level of the brain stem and cerebellum determines which type or combination of movements is most appropriate under the particular circumstances.The motor commands for gaze shifts formed in the brain stem depend on control signals descending from higher centers, in particular, from the superior colliculus (SC) and several eye-movement related areas of the cerebral cortex The superior colliculus (SC) is a multilayered structure lying on the roof of the midbrain. In nonmammals, the homologous structure is called the optic tectum, which serves as the primary center for processing retinal inputs and for transforming sensory inputs into commands for orienting movements. In mammals, the SC has a similar functional role, and consists of superfi cial layers that receive direct inputs from the retina and striate cortex, and intermediate and deep layers that receive inputs from extrastriate, parietal, and frontal cortex, and the basal ganglia. Neurons in the superfi cial layers have responses to visual stimuli that are enhanced when the stimulus is the target of a saccade. Neurons in the intermediate and deep layers may also respond to visual stimuli, and also to auditory stimuli from corresponding locations, so that the visual and auditory maps of the animal's surroundings are in register. It is these intermediate and deep layers that also possess the movement-related activity that plays a crucial role in the control of gaze shifts The most distinctive feature of the superior colliculus is that it contains a retinotopic map of contralateral visual space and this topography applies to the movement-related activity in the deeper layers as well as to the visual activity in the superfi cial layers During naturally occurring eye movements, activity in the superior colliculus is not restricted to just the few neurons that best match the endpoint of the saccade, but is distributed across a large number of neurons across the retinotopic map. This point was elegantly demonstrated by testing what happens to saccades when the injection of chemical agents into the superior colliculus temporarily inactivates neurons at a particular location in the map become hypermetric (bigger than normal), because the inactivation removes the contribution from neurons that code for more proximal locations and smaller saccades. These results show that saccades are guided by the vector average of population activity in the superior colliculus, and were the fi rst demonstration of vector averaging in a mammalian motor system.The intermediate layers of the superior colliculus contain two main classes of neurons related to the control of gaze In the part of the superior colliculus map that represents the central visual fi eld, the neuronal activity is somewhat different. Like the rest of the map, this part also contains burst neurons that fi re during saccades, although the preferred saccades are smaller, as would be expected. In place of buildup activity, however, there are neurons that show tonic activity during fi xation and decrease their activity during most saccades The frontal eye fi eld (FEF) exerts its control on gaze shifts through several descending pathways, including FIGURE 33.10 The superior colliculus and its retinotopic (or oculocentric) map of saccades and target positions. The left plot shows that electrical stimulation in the superior colliculus causes eye movements whose direction and amplitude depends on the location. Each arrow corresponds to a stimulation site in the left superior colliculus, and the length and direction of the arrow indicate the metrics of the evoked saccade. The evoked saccades are all directed rightward, but rostral sites are associated with smaller movements than caudal sites, and medial sites are associated with upward movements whereas lateral sites are associated with downward movements. The right plot summarizes these results in the form of a continuous map of saccades and target positions. As in the visual cortex, the representation of the center of the visual fi eld is amplifi ed. Adapted from Most neurons in the FEF also have visual responses, including a large class of visuo-movement neurons that show activity for both visual stimuli and the eye movements that follow. These visually responsive neurons often show activity related to the selection of the target. Prior to the gaze shift, the activity evoked by the nonselected stimulus is rapidly suppressed, whereas the activity for the selected stimulus remains conspicuous. Some FEF neurons discriminate visual targets even in the complete absence of an eye movement response, indicating that their activity is related to the allocation of visual attention rather than to the preparation of eye movements. Indeed, stimulation within the FEF with currents too weak to directly cause eye movements can nonetheless enhance the visual responses of neurons located in other visual areas of cortex, and can improve the behavioral performance on visual discrimination tasks Another region of frontal cortex, the supplementary eye fi eld (SEF), plays a less direct role in the control of saccades but is important for movements that are guided by cognitive factors. Neurons in the SEF are preferentially modulated in tasks that involve more abstract instructions, such as when saccades are directed to a particular side of an object rather than to a spatial location, or when saccades are directed to the location opposite the visual stimulus (the "antisaccade" task). During pursuit eye movements, SEF neurons are especially active when the target moves along a predictable trajectory.The lateral intraparietal area (LIP) plays a major role in the process of visual selection that precedes the generation of gaze shifts. Reversible inactivation of neurons in area LIP does not cause large defi cits in the timing or accuracy of gaze shifts, but it dramatically reduces the frequency of movements toward the affected portions of the visual fi eld, especially when competing stimuli are present elsewhere Neurons in LIP show activity related to visual attention and to the intention to make gaze shifts to particular locations in visual space. When an attentiongrabbing, but irrelevant, distracter stimulus appears while the animal is preparing a saccade directed elsewhere, the activity of LIP neurons closely tracks the short-lived shift of attention to the distracter and its subsequent return to the intended location of the saccade The middle temporal area (MT) and the medial superior temporal area (MST) are the primary sources of visual motion information that are used to construct the motor commands for pursuit. This motion informationalso is used to adjust the size of saccades made to moving visual targets. These cortical areas provide these inputs through several pathways, including projections to other cortical areas involved in controlling gaze shifts (in particular, the FEF), descending projections to the vestibulocerebellum via the basal pontine nuclei, and projections to the pretectum, which contains neurons with activity related to the OKR and pursuit.Neurons in MT and MST have activity related to the velocity of visual stimuli. In MT, neurons have smaller receptive fi elds and activity that depends on the presence of a visual stimulus. Lesions in MT produce blind spots for seeing motion that affect the motor commands for pursuit and saccades, and the perception of motion as well. In MST, neurons have larger receptive fi elds and prefer more complex patterns of visual motion. Lesions in MST also produce blind spots for motion, but in addition, cause a directional defi cit in pursuit for movements directed to the ipsilateral side The caudate nucleus (CN) and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNpr) are parts of the basal ganglia that form an important circuit for controlling when gaze shifts are initiated. The SNpr applies tonic inhibition to the superior colliculus using GABA-ergic synapses, suppressing the response to the many excitatory inputs to the superior colliculus that might otherwise evoke gaze shifts. When SNpr neurons reduce or pause their activity, there is a disinhibition of activity in the superior colliculus, which then permits gaze shifts to be initiated. The SNpr itself is under inhibitory control from the CN, which contains neurons that increase their activity with gaze shifts. Together, this series of inhibitory connections through the basal ganglia act to gate the generation of gaze shifts by the superior colliculus.The basal ganglia appear to be especially important for gaze shifts involving reward and motivation. For example, the visual responses of CN neurons is larger for stimuli that are associated with larger rewards In addition to these descending pathways, there are also ascending pathways to eye movement-related areas of cortex from nuclei in the central thalamus. These nuclei receive inputs from a wide range of oculomotor structures, including the superior colliculus, substantia nigra pars reticulata, cerebellum, the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi, and the brain stem reticular formation. Feedback through the thalamus appears to convey corollary discharge signals about the gaze shifts that are executed by downstream motor structures, and is used to update the control signals formed in the cortex. Thus, when the central thalamus is inactivated by chemical agents, single saccades can still be made accurately, even in the dark, but subsequent saccades are spatially inaccurate, as though the intervening movement had not been taken into account The functions of saccades and pursuit are distinct, and yet during normal gaze shifts the two types of movements are tightly coordinated and almost always select the same visual target. How is this coordination achieved? One possibility is that target selection for pursuit is determined by the generation of saccades. When subjects are presented with two moving stimuli simultaneously, they almost always begin smooth pursuit in a direction that is the average of the two motions. After a brief period of this "vector average" pursuit, subjects make a saccade toward one stimulus or the other and then pursue that one selectively. These observations suggest that pursuit target selection is serially linked to saccade execution Another possibility is that targets are selected in common for pursuit and saccades. Pursuit typically starts earlier than saccades, and the stimulus selected by pursuit usually predicts the target of the saccade choice by ∼50 ms. This suggests that the two choices are guided by the same decision signals, but saccades might use a somewhat more stringent decision criterion. Consistent with this view, pursuit and saccades exhibit nearly the same tradeoff between speed and accuracy, but saccades tend to be delayed and somewhat more accurate A crucial aspect of voluntary gaze shifts is that they are selectively guided by objects of interest to the observer, despite the fact that our surroundings usually contain many other distracting signals. This selectivity is achieved by a tight functional link between the control of gaze shifts and the mechanisms of visual attention. When gaze shifts, the movement of the eyes always is preceded by a shift of visual attention to the new location. For example, when subjects are asked to detect visual targets that appear just before a saccade is made, performance is much better when the target and saccade locations coincide than when they do not The tight linkage between visual attention and the planning of eye movements provides support for the premotor theory of attention, which posits that the mechanisms for spatial attention and eye motor programming are essentially the same. The theory is controversial, because the degree of overlap between attention and eye movements depends on which level of brain organization is considered relevant. As described in the previous section, there is substantial overlap between the areas of the brain involved in the control of attention and eye movements, consistent with the theory. On the other hand, the activity of single neurons in these areas can often be attributed to either visual attention or motor planning, but not both. Resolving these issues will require understanding how the properties of individual neurons are brought together into the larger functional circuits that span brain areas.Much of what we know about the neural control of gaze shifts was learned using very simple visual, often small bright spots in an otherwise dark room. These studies made it possible to test and identify the basic feedback mechanisms and motor circuits that control gaze shifts. However, it is now generally recognized that under more natural conditions, eye movements show properties that are more complex and fl exible. One striking set of examples is provided by the work of Yarbus Gaze shifts also reveal properties of the visual processing steps required to segment and interpret the visual scene. In one demonstration, a few lights are attached to the rim of a wagon wheel, which is then rolled along in an otherwise dark display. Although the retinal stimulus consists of several spots, each undergoing cycloidal motion, subjects perceive the horizontal motion of the wheel and are able to easily track this motion with their eyes Visual perception also is changed by eye movements. In particular, the world is not perceived as moving during saccadic eye movements, despite the rapid motion of the retinal image. You can demonstrate this to yourself by watching yourself make saccades in a mirror-you can see that your eyes change position, but you cannot see them actually move. This phenomenon is referred to as saccadic suppression, and it refers to the observation that the ability to detect visual stimuli is reduced dramatically during saccadic eye movements, especially for visual stimuli with low spatial frequencies Studying the development of eye movements is especially challenging, because infants are not always cooperative subjects, and the observed changes in eye movements are due to developmental changes that occur at sensory as well as motor stages of processing. Nonetheless, in humans, all eye movements appear to be different in infants than they are in adults, and the development of eye movements that stabilize gaze (e.g., VOR and OKR) follow a faster time course than those that act to shift gaze (e.g., saccades and pursuit).Human infants are born with an excellent VOR. In fact, the gain of the VOR (the ratio of eye velocity to head velocity) in infants is approximately 1, which is better than that typically found in adults. The temporal dynamics of the VOR are somewhat different at birth, possibly refl ecting an immature neural integrator, but these achieve near-adult values within the fi rst six months of life. The strong VOR at birth compensates for the fact that the OKR is not fully developed until age 5-6 months. The OKR in infants is symmetric for rightward and leftward motion, but only when viewed binocularly (i.e., with both eyes). With monocular viewing, the amplitude of the OKR is markedly larger for horizontal motion directed toward the nose than for motion directed away from the nose. This directional asymmetry is like that found in the adult OKR of "lower" mammals such as the rabbit, and in cats that have been reared with disrupted visual inputs from one eye. The asymmetry in infants is believed to be due to the delayed maturation of the cortical inputs to the visual nuclei in the brain stem, which confer binocularity and other visual properties to the neurons in the pretectum important for generating the OKR.As might be expected given the relative immaturity of the visual system at birth, saccades and pursuit take many months to approach adult-like characteristics. Newborns can generate saccades in response to a visual target, but the latencies are long and the movements fall well short of the target. In fact, 1-month old infants typically acquire the target by making a series of three to fi ve saccades, each of which is approximately the same size and which scales with the initial eccentricity of the visual target. Over time during the fi rst year, the number of sequential saccades decreases and their amplitude increases. Similarly, newborns have a limited ability to generate pursuit eye movements, and the responses are better for larger stimuli that likely also activate the OKR. The gain of pursuit to small target spots is very low (0.5 or less) in the fi rst few postnatal months, and saccades often are used to FIGURE 33.11 The scan path depends on the goals of the observer. Among other experiments, keep up with the target. Interestingly, the pursuit velocity generated at these young ages is not only low, but does not scale with the velocity of the visual target, presumably due to the delayed maturation of the cortical circuits involved in motion processing. The ability to match target speed improves markedly by the end of the fi rst year, as does the ability to use prediction to guided pursuit. However, for both saccades and pursuit, the exact age at which the movements become adult-like is diffi cult to determine.Even in adulthood, the circuits for controlling gaze movements are continually adjusted to compensate for changes in the motor output and the sensory inputs. As many of us have experienced after getting a new pair of eye glasses, which changes the VOR output needed to stabilize the visual world, the inaccuracies in the programming of eye movements usually are corrected automatically and fairly rapidly. This type of adaptive control is especially important for rapid movements like the VOR and saccades, because the movements occur too rapidly to be corrected mid-fl ight by visual feedback.For saccades, the adaptation is guided by visual signals about whether the eyes have landed on the target. This feedback is used by structures such as the oculomotor vermis in the cerebellum to adjust the "pulse" component of the command for saccades. Saccadic adaptation also depends on visual signals about whether the eye stays on target after the saccade or drifts off. This visual motion feedback is used by the vestibulocerebellum to adjust the size of the "step" component of the saccade command. Adaptive changes in saccades also tend to be spatially specifi c rather than parametric-the changes affect a limited range of saccade amplitudes and directions near the adapted saccade, rather than simply scaling all saccades. This property illustrates the great fl exibility and precision of the output motor pathways in fi ne-tuning the control of saccades.Adaptive changes to the VOR have been extensively studied and provide a general model for understanding the neural basis of motor learning. It is well established that the vestibulocerebellum plays a fundamental role in motor learning for the VOR, but the exact role of the cerebellum remains controversial. Early studies emphasized the role of the cerebellar cortex as the principal site of learning. Theories put forward by Marr and Albus, and elaborated by Ito, drew attention to the crystalline structure of the cerebellar cortex and highlighted the synaptic interactions that might take place on the output neurons from the cerebellar cortex, the Purkinje cells. In particular, they proposed that climbing fi ber inputs to the cerebellar cortex provide visual "error signals" that modify the strength of parallel fi ber synapses providing vestibular information to Purkinje cells. Subsequent studies have supported this proposal by showing that paired stimulation of the climbing fi bers and parallel fi bers induces a long-term depression (LTD) of the parallel fi ber synapse. However, other studies have shown that although the cerebellum is critical for VOR adaptation, it could be removed after the adaptation was complete without changing the state of the VOR. This led later researchers to propose that the cerebellum does not store the motor memory needed for VOR plasticity but instead computes an instructive signal that induces changes elsewhere, such as in the vestibular nuclei that receive the cerebellar output. These careful studies of the VOR circuit have made it possible now to begin probing the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie this basic form of learning.Eye movements serve two different functions. First, eye movements stabilize gaze when animals move about in their environment. Unpredictable high-speed rotations of the head, which are produced whenever an animal moves, shift the line of gaze and, by smearing the optical image, reduce the resolution of the visual system. These high-velocity movements are compensated for by counter-rotations of the eyes generated by the VOR. Working in tandem with the VOR is the optokinetic system. The optokinetic system compensates for the slower movements of the head, which happen so gradually that the vestibular system cannot accurately detect them. Second, in animals with retinas that have a small region of high resolution, eye movements shift gaze to redirect the line of sight to objects or features in the visual scene that are of particular interest. Saccades are fast, discrete movements that quickly move the image of a visual target to the center of the retina where acuity is best. Pursuit is a slow, continuous movement that compensates for the motion of the visual target, minimizing the blurring that would otherwise limit acuity. Although the properties of saccades and pursuit are distinct, the two types of movements are closely coordinated during visual search of the environment and both are tightly linked to visual attention. Together, the different types of eye movements make it possible to effi ciently gather the visual information that is important for achieving other, longer-term behavioral goals.Eye movements are controlled by circuits that span the brain. The eyes themselves are a relatively simple motor apparatus, and they are controlled by a fi nal 792 33. EYE MOVEMENTS V. MOTOR SYSTEMS motor pathway in the brain stem that is shared by all classes of eye movements. The construction of the motor commands involves generating an eye velocity command to move the eyes, and an integrated version of this command to hold the eyes at their new position. These motor commands are constructed by circuits in the brain stem reticular formation, and fi ne-tuned by additional circuits involving several parts of the cerebellum. The descending control signals that drive these motor commands are provided by multiple brain regions, but the superior colliculus in the midbrain and the frontal eye fi elds in the cortex are especially important. These brain regions help integrate sensory inputs with a variety of higher-order infl uences so that eye movements are directed to the appropriate visual stimuli.Overall, eye movements provide a window into the brain mechanisms that accomplish motor control, but also the mechanisms of neural plasticity, sensorymotor interactions, and higher-order process like attention and perception.The Hypothalamus: An Overview of Regulatory SystemsThe hypothalamus is an integrative center essential for survival of an organism and reproduction of its species. Regulatory systems emerged as each organism adapted to its environment and have evolved to control the complex interactions of physiology and behavior.The diversity in regulatory function of the hypothalamus is refl ected in its structure, neurochemistry, and connections. Almost every major subdivision of the central nervous system (CNS) communicates with the hypothalamus and is subject to its infl uence. In addition, the hypothalamus communicates with peripheral organ systems by converting synaptic information to blood-borne hormonal signals. In turn, the hypothalamus responds to feedback from the peripheral systems that it regulates. The chapters in this section discuss the processes by which the hypothalamus infl uences physiology and behavior, and the purpose of this chapter is to provide an introductory context for those presentations. We begin by providing a historical perspective on research that has defi ned the hypothalamus as an important regulatory center, continue with an overview of its structural and functional organization, and conclude with a discussion of how this region of the diencephalon functions within brain circuitry devoted to the control of motivated behaviors.Research on the hypothalamus has a rich and storied history. Although depicted in early brain atlases, the hypothalamus was not recognized as a distinct division of the diencephalon until the work of Wilhelm His (1893). Our understanding of the structure and function of the hypothalamus developed as basic and clinical neurosciences were integrated. Harvey Cushing, a neurosurgeon who studied endocrine disorders from a neuroscience perspective provided important and infl uential early insights into hypothalamic function. He described diabetes insipidus, a neuroendocrine dysfunction of uncontrolled urinary water excretion and thirst, and identifi ed the importance of injury to the pituitary stalk in the condition. Cushing also described the syndrome that bears his name, Cushing's syndrome, a disorder characterized by excessive secretion of adrenal corticoids, and he was among the fi rst to recognize that the hypothalamus and pituitary form a functional unit. He was a pioneer in the development of pituitary surgery and is viewed as a founder of the fi elds of neurosurgery and endocrinology. In 1929, summing up his work in this area shortly before his retirement, Cushing wrote of the hypothalamus, "Here in this well concealed spot, almost to be covered with a thumb nail, lies the very mainspring of primitive existence-vegetative, emotional, reproductive-on which, with more or less success, man has come to superimpose a cortex of inhibitions." VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS autonomic control, reproductive function, and emotional behavior. This work progressed so well that in 1940 it could be summarized only in a large volume of the annual series of the "Association for Research in Nervous and Mental Disease." In that volume, Ernst and Berta In the 1950s Harris and Green defi ned the means through which the hypothalamus regulates the anterior lobe of the pituitary. Their identifi cation of a neurovascular link, the portal plexus, through which the hypothalamus regulates the anterior pituitary, fundamentally altered concepts of hypothalamic function and neuroendocrine regulation. The neurochemical basis of anterior pituitary regulation was revealed in the 1970s when Guillemin and Schally independently isolated and characterized peptide hormones that acted on the anterior pituitary. In subsequent years the fi eld of neuroendocrinology built enormously on these observations, and the resulting literature documents a diverse family of hypothalamic peptides that are transported through the portal plexus to stimulate or inhibit the release of other hormones from the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland.We have made great progress in improving our understanding of Cushing's "mainspring of primitive existence." Tremendous insights into CNS function have emerged from the analysis of hypothalamic structure and function, underscoring the importance of this small, complex region of the diencephalon in the regulation of homeostasis and behavioral functions essential for survival.Early studies of hypothalamic organization defi ned subdivisions that were largely based upon landmarks visible on the ventral surface of the brain. On this basis, three major subdivisions were defi ned based upon their associations with the optic chiasm (chiasmatic), the tuberal eminence containing the pituitary stalk (tuberal), and the mammillary bodies (mammillary) and arcuate nuclei. The medial zone lies adjacent to the periventricular zone and contains cell groups that vary in size and cell morphology, but are organized into cytoarchitecturally distinct nuclei. This contrasts with the diffusely distributed neurons of the lateral zone, which is the least distinct of the three columns. Neurons in all three regions have been further subdivided on the basis of cellular phenotype, connectivity, and cellular markers of cellular activation that allow investigators to impose functional defi nitions.To effectively integrate diverse physiological processes and behaviors, the hypothalamus must communicate with systems in both the brain and periphery. More than any other region of the nervous system, the hypothalamus depends on conversion of synaptic information to hormonal signals. In addition, the hypothalamus is subject to feedback regulation by the physiological processes that it controls. The following sections describe basic organization principles that govern hypothalamic function.Projections from all major subdivisions of the nervous system terminate within the hypothalamus. In many instances, such as vision, monosynaptic projections bring fi rst-order sensory information from the periphery directly to hypothalamic nuclei. In other cases, such as limbic projections, multisynaptic cerebral pathways relay processed information to the hypothalamus. Integration of this sensory information is an essential function of the hypothalamus and has profound infl uence on the regulatory outputs of hypothalamic nuclei. These diverse systems are best understood by looking at the functions that they modulate.Multisynaptic pathways allow the olfactory system to infl uence neurons in many parts of the hypothalamus. Olfactory information passes directly to the olfactory tubercle, piriform cortex, and amygdala, which in turn relay it to the hypothalamus through the medial forebrain bundle (corticohypothalamic projections), stria terminalis, ventral amygdalofugal pathway, and fornix. In many vertebrates, olfaction is integral to behaviors involved in reproduction, defense, and feeding, and this is refl ected in the large amount of forebrain dedicated to the processing of olfactory stimuli. Insight into the complexity of these circuits is apparent in recent rodent studies employing transneuronal tracing technology to defi ne polysynaptic olfactory circuits that innervate hypothalamic neurons involved in the regulation of reproduction and fertility A principal function of the hypothalamus is to impose temporal organization on hormonal and behavioral processes through the timekeeping properties of the biological clock in the rostral hypothalamus. The neurons that constitute this clock are found within the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). The genetically determined circadian rhythmicity of SCN neurons provides a timekeeping capacity that is essential to successful adaptation to the environment and, in many instances, reproduction of organisms. Importantly, the rhythmic activity of the biological clock is responsive to environmental cues, which is accomplished through central visual projections of the retina. A unique population of ganglion cells that contain light sensitive melanopsin transduces light in the retina. The central projections of these ganglion cells through the retinohypothalamic projection synchronize the circadian activity of SCN neurons with the daily cycle of light and dark. Polysynaptic connections from the clock that infl uence melatonin secretion from the pineal gland also provide a feedback mechanism for measuring day length that is important for the timing of reproduction in photoperiodic species. The responsiveness of this regulatory system to variations in photoperiod is also responsible for the "jet lag" that humans suffer when traveling across time zones. Surprisingly, the neural projections of the SCN are largely confi ned to the hypothalamus. Therefore, the SCN is dependent upon relays that integrate a variety of sensory information important for the temporal organization of diverse functions regulated by the hypothalamus. A more detailed description of this "circadian timing system" is presented in Chapter 41.Sensory information also reaches the hypothalamus through ascending projections arising from neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) of the caudal brain stem. The NTS is the principal visceral sensory nucleus that receives topographically organized input from the major organ systems of the body by way of cranial nerves X and IX, the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves. As such, it is the fi rst region in the CNS to process information about visceral, cardiovascular, and respiratory functions, as well as taste. The NTS coordinates refl ex modulation of peripheral organ function and sends processed sensory information to forebrain nuclei, where it is integrated in the control of more complex physiological processes and behaviors.Neurons in the paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus (PVH) and the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) are prominent among a subset of hypothalamic nuclei that receive direct projections from the NTS and indirect projections reach the hypothalamus through the ventrolateral medulla and parabrachial nucleus in the pons. Many of these projections are bidirectional and are part of a larger system that includes the central nucleus of the amygdala, bed nuclei of the stria terminalis, and insular cortex. In addition, the NTS and parabrachial nuclei relay splanchnic visceral and nociceptive sensory information from the spinal cord. This "interoceptive" sensory feedback has an important infl uence upon autonomic and endocrine outputs of the hypothalamus essential for regulation of homeostasis, and recent evidence suggests that it also infl uences mood. Evidence for the latter is particularly prevalent in literature examining sensory integration related to stress induced activation of the endocrine and autonomic axes.The medial forebrain bundle (mfb) is a group of thin fi bers that traverse the lateral zone of the hypothalamus. This bidirectional fi ber tract provides extrinsic inputs to a number of hypothalamic nuclei and is used as a conduit for hypothalamic neurons to communicate with other regions of the neuraxis. Early nonspecifi c stimulation and lesion experiments incorrectly attributed certain functions to the lateral hypothalamus that actually are associated with axons passing through the mfb to other regions of the brain.Monoaminergic axons arising from neurons in the midbrain and medulla are a major constituent of this fi ber tract. They include axons from noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus and lateral tegmental cell groups, as well as serotoninergic neurons of the brain stem raphe nuclei. Many of these axons generate collaterals that terminate throughout the hypothalamus as they course rostrally to innervate other forebrain regions. Serotoninergic neurons in the midbrain raphe nuclei also generate a dense plexus of axons that enter the cerebral ventricles and arborize on the luminal surface of the ependyma. The precise function of this intraventricular plexus is not known.A number of systems not functionally associated with the hypothalamus also pass through the mfb. Prominent among these are dopaminergic axons arising from the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area (VTA). The nigral component of this projection plays an important role in the regulation of movement whereas the VTA exerts a widespread infl uence on the cortex as well as ventral striatal regions involved in motivated behaviors and addiction. These projection systems are distinct from the dopaminergic neurons in the hypothalamus (e.g., arcuate nuclei), which play an important role in neuroendocrine regulation.In the 1930s, James VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS topography of this projection is apparent at its origin in the hippocampus and is preserved in the lateral septal nuclei and in the hypothalamus where second order projections innervate the three longitudinally organized columns of the hypothalamus, although not equally. Thus, this projection system is in a position to regulate neuroendocrine and autonomic function and ingestive behavior (periventricular zone), modulate motivated reproductive and agonistic behaviors (rostral medial zone), and also provide polysynaptic feedback projections to the hippocampus via the mammillary complex. The demonstration of "place" and "head-direction" cells in the hippocampal formation suggests that this projection is the source of adaptive multimodal sensory information relevant to a variety of hypothalamic functions (e.g., foraging).Limbic projections arising from the amygdala also have a prominent infl uence on hypothalamic function through two projection pathways. The stria terminalis arises from neurons in the amygdala and follows a looping trajectory similar to the course of the fornix. Axons coursing through this pathway ramify within the bed nucleus and then enter the hypothalamus rostrally. Amygdala neurons also innervate the hypothalamus via the ventral amygdalofugal bundle, which passes directly over the optic tract to the hypothalamus. The demonstrated role of the amygdaloid complex in the expression of fear suggests that these projections play an important role in orchestrating the endocrine and autonomic components of the fear response.Not all sensory information reaching the hypothalamus is of synaptic origin. Some regions of the CNS are chemosensitive to blood-borne molecules. Such information about body fl uid composition has important implications for the maintenance of homeostasis. Circumventricular organs (CVOs) are integral to this regulation. Seven CVOs surround the ventricular system in the diencephalon, midbrain, and hindbrain ( The extensive infl uence of the hypothalamus on behavior and physiology is refl ected in its effector systems. The hypothalamus has conventional synaptic connections with essentially every major subdivision of the CNS and plays a major role in the control of behavioral state. As noted earlier, it also has regulatory control over the pituitary gland and thereby exerts a profound infl uence over peripheral physiology. Thus, the output of hypothalamic systems is integral to the integrated expression of physiology and behavior.Regulation of the sleep-wake cycle is a distributed process that involves the integrated action of the reticular activating system and the diencephalon. Early studies employing lesions and knife cuts conducted by Moruzzi, Magoun, and Bremer demonstrated the importance of the brain stem reticular activating system in the generation of consciousness. Subsequently, Nauta postulated the existence of sleep centers in the hypothalamus based upon the consequences of lesions to the rostral or caudal hypothalamus. In those rodent studies, he demonstrated that lesions of the preoptic region produced insomnia and that somnolence resulted from lesions of the caudal hypothalamus.Until recently, little was known regarding the specifi c hypothalamic cell groups involved in sleep regulation. However, identifi cation of the circadian FIGURE 34.4 The location of the seven circumventricular organs (shown in red) in the rat brain (midsaggital section) are illustrated. Three CVOs that have an intimate functional association with the hypothalamus are illustrated in transverse sections in the lower fi gures. AP, area postrema; ARH, arcuate nucleus; cc, corpus callosum; CU, cuneate nucleus; df, dorsal fornix; DMHa, anterior portion of the dorsomedial nucleus; DMHp, posterior portion of dorsomedial nucleus; DMHv, ventral portion of dorsomedial nucleus; DMX, dorsal motor vagal nucleus; GR, gracile nucleus; ME, median eminence; mlf, medial longitudinal fasiculus; co, commissural portion of the nucleus of the solitary tract; NTSl, lateral portion of the nucleus of the solitary tract; NTSm, medial portion of the nucleus of the solitary tract; OVLT, vascular organ of the lamina terminalis; PH, posterior hypothalamus; P, pineal gland; PMR, paramedian reticular nucleus; PVi, intermediate part of periventricular nucleus; SCO, subcommissural organ; SF, septofi mbrial nucleus; SFO, subfornical organ; ts, tractus solitarius; V-III, third ventricle; VMHc, central part of ventromedial nucleus; VMHvl, ventrolateral part of ventromedial nucleus; XII, hypoglossal nucleus. pacemaker in the early 1970s marked the beginning of an era in which the hypothalamic contributions to behavioral state regulation have become increasingly clear. This literature has confi rmed the early hypotheses of Nauta and identifi ed cell groups in the rostral and caudal hypothalamus whose activity correlates with sleep or arousal.The rostral hypothalamus is resident to two cell groups that are infl uential in the regulation of the sleep-wake cycle. Of these, the suprachiasmatic nuclei, or "Mind's Clock," are well known for their genetically determined oscillatory activity. A large literature has established that SCN activity opposes the homeostatic drive for sleep (Chapter 42). In contrast, Saper and colleagues Compelling evidence also supports the conclusion that the caudal hypothalamus contains another population of neurons that, like the tuberomammillary nuclei, is diffusely projecting and implicated in the control of arousal. These neurons are found within the posterior and lateral hypothalamus and contain a recently discovered peptide known as hypocretin (or orexin). Studies of the causal mechanisms underlying the sleep disorder known as narcolepsy implicate this population of neurons in the regulation of behavioral state. Narcolepsy is a disorder characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness and sudden inappropriate intrusion of sleep during waking. A defect in one of the hypocretin receptors has been demonstrated in a canine model widely employed to study the disease, and transgenic mice lacking the hypocretin gene display sleep-wake disturbances similar to narcolepsy. Additionally, cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF) levels of hypocretin are reduced in humans suffering from this disorder, and postmortem analysis of the hypothalamus of narcoleptics has demonstrated substantial reductions in the number of hypocretin neurons.These fi ndings, along with the aforementioned literature and the documented infl uence of the biological clock on the temporal organization of the sleep-wake cycle, are consistent with an important role for the hypothalamus in the regulation of behavioral state. Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that the hypothalamus functions within a larger ensemble of neurons devoted to behavioral state regulation. Particularly important in this regard are monoaminergic and cholinergic brain stem neurons, as well as thalamic and basal forebrain cell groups (Chapter 42). Understanding how these distributed systems function in an integrated fashion to control behavioral state remains an important goal.The median eminence is the gateway through which the hypothalamus exerts regulatory control over peripheral organ systems. This CVO is continuous with the pituitary gland through a thin tissue bridge known as the infundibular stalk. Hypothalamic neurons exercise this regulatory control via the release of peptides and dopamine (DA) into the vasculature and the infundibular stalk is essential to this regulation.Magnocellular neurons in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei give rise to axons that project through the median eminence and infundibular stalk to terminate in the posterior lobe of the pituitary Extensive hypothalamic control over peripheral organ systems is achieved through the release of peptides and DA into fenestrated capillaries in the median eminence. These fenestrated capillaries loop through the median eminence and coalesce to form long portal vessels that travel along the infundibular stalk to terminate in the vascular sinuses in the anterior pituitary. A variety of parvicellular (small) neurosecretory neurons distinguished by peptide phenotype contribute to this regulation either by stimulating or by inhibiting the release of hormones from the anterior lobe of the pituitary. The PVH and arcuate nuclei contain a large proportion of these neurons. PVH neurons are found within the parvicellular subdivisions of the nucleus and produce a diverse group of peptides, such as corticotropin-releasing hormone and thyrotropinreleasing hormone. Similarly, neurons in the arcuate nucleus produce peptides, such as growth hormonereleasing hormone, and neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, that infl uence the secretory activity of the anterior pituitary. Thus, the synaptic activity of neurons projecting on these hypothalamic neurons is integrated, and the information is converted to a hormonal signal that ultimately infl uences peripheral physiology. Axons of magnocellular neurons in the PVH and supraoptic nuclei (SON) (shown in red) traverse the internal layer of the median eminence (ME) and the infundibular stalk to terminate on a vascular plexus in the neural (posterior) lobe of the pituitary gland (NL). Parvicellular PVH neurons infl uence the functional activity of the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland (AL) through projections (shown in blue) that terminate on a fenestrated capillary plexus, the portal plexus, in the external zone of the median eminence. The terminals of these axons release peptides and neurotransmitters into the portal vasculature, which carries them to the anterior lobe of the pituitary. Parvicellular PVH neurons also give rise to descending projections (shown in turquoise) to autonomic nuclei in the brain stem and spinal cord. ac, anterior commissure; och, optic chiasm.The ability of mammals to reproduce depends on the function of the hypothalamus and its ability to communicate with the pituitary gland. This is especially true for the production of gametes, whose maturation and release in both males and females require a functionally intact hypothalamic-pituitary axis. The hypothalamus also plays an essential role in the organization and expression of the complex behaviors necessary for copulation (see Chapter 40).Experimental studies in rodents have demonstrated that the rostral medial zone of the hypothalamus plays an important role in orchestrating reproductive behaviors. The medial preoptic region participates in the control of masculine sexual behavior, such as erection, mounting, and ejaculation, whereas ventral regions of the hypothalamus play a major role in the control of feminine sexual behaviors, such as lordosis.A number of hypothalamic cell groups implicated in reproductive function are sexually dimorphic. For example, ultrastructural studies of a preoptic region in male and female rats have demonstrated differences in synaptology that develop in response to perinatal exposure to androgens. Also, differences in the size and serotonergic innervation of the medial preoptic nuclei of male and female rats have been demonstrated. The possibility that similar dimorphisms are present in the human hypothalamus is supported by the identifi cation of a region of the human preoptic region that is approximately twice as large in males as in females. Although the functional signifi cance of sexual dimorphism in the structure and connectivity of the hypothalamus remains to be established, the gender of the brain is clearly determined by the hormonal milieu present during a critical period of development.Much is known about the hypothalamic cell groups that infl uence the production of gametes. The production of ova and sperm is controlled by the release of gonadotropins from the anterior pituitary gland, which is in turn is regulated by the hypothalamus in a gender specifi c manner. For example, spermatogenesis occurs in response to constant release of gonadotropins in males, whereas ovulation is a cyclic event initiated by a rhythmic surge in gonadotropin release in females. In both cases, hypothalamic neurons produce gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) to stimulate the release of gonadotropin from the anterior lobe of the pituitary. The gender-specifi c patterns of gonadotropin release imply that there are sexual differences in the functional organization of circuitry that controls the activity of GnRH neurons. One postulated sexually dimorphic difference is a central pattern generator, thought to be responsible for the cyclic release of GnRH in females. The identity, organization, and regulation of the cell groups that contribute to this pattern generator remain an active and important focus of investigation.The hypothalamus is a prominent component of the central network of neurons that regulates autonomic function. Descending projections from the hypothalamus to autonomic cell groups in the brain stem and spinal cord exert a strong infl uence upon the sympathetic (thoracic) and parasympathetic (craniallumbosacral) divisions of the autonomic nervous system (ANS). Several hypothalamic cell groups also indirectly infl uence the ANS through relays that integrate processed sensory information and project to the preganglionic neurons of the spinal cord that are the fi nal common pathway for autonomic outfl ow. Brain stem neurons involved in cardiovascular regulation are among the best-characterized examples of such relays. For example, brain stem neurons in the rostroventrolateral medulla (RVLM) exert control over mean arterial pressure through direct projections to sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the intermediolateral cell column of thoracic spinal cord. The activity of these neurons is controlled in a refl ex manner through a caudal brain stem circuit that integrates baroreceptor sensory input terminating in the NTS (Chapter 36). However, descending projections from the hypothalamus (e.g., paraventricular nucleus) and other CNS cell groups important for coordinating autonomic function and behavioral responses to environmental challenges also infl uence the activity of RVLM neurons. This is one of many relays through which the central network devoted to autonomic control provides a dynamic regulatory capacity ideally suited for maintaining homeostasis and ensuring adaptive changes in physiology to environmental challenges.Like homeostasis, the hypothalamus exerts an infl uence over the immune system through neuroendocrine output and through the ANS. Szentivanyi and colleagues examined the effects of hypothalamic lesions and stimulation on anaphylactic responses and found that the diencephalon may infl uence immune function. Fever is one consequence of an activated immune system. Thus, the neural circuits that control temperature regulation provide important insights into neuralimmune interactions. In this regard, it is well known that the hypothalamus contains populations of neurons that either stimulate or inhibit heat production. These include heat sensitive neurons in the medial preoptic area that act to reduce core body temperature by inhibiting other neurons in the hypothalamus and caudal brainstem that induce thermogenesis when activated Insight into the regions of the brain involved in fl uid homeostasis has come from observing the response of neurons to dehydration and other experimental changes in the internal milieu. The hypothalamus is a prominent component of a set of CNS nuclei in which neurons respond to dehydration (an increase in fl uid osmolarity) and changes in blood volume by increasing their metabolic activity. Activated neurons have been demonstrated in the subfornical organ, the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei, and an area of the rostral hypothalamus known as the AV3V region, which includes the median preoptic nucleus and the OVLT. These regions interact with neurons in the area postrema, the nucleus of the solitary tract, the noradrenergic cell groups of the brain stem, and the parabrachial nucleus to integrate peripheral stimuli and elicit adaptive changes in the fl uid environment of the organism. CVOs subserve prominent regulatory functions within this circuitry.The SFO has dense projections to the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei, to the region adjacent to the OVLT, and to the perifornical region of the lateral hypothalamic area. Such projections are consistent with postulated roles of the SFO in autonomic and homeostatic functions. The peptide hormone angiotensin II (AII) is integral to the way in which the SFO transduces peripheral signals and then produces compensatory neural responses. When blood pressure falls, the kidneys release renin into the bloodstream. Renin triggers a biochemical cascade that produces AII. Because of the absence of a blood-brain barrier in the SFO, circulating AII can enter the SFO and bind AII receptors on SFO neurons. Interestingly, SFO neurons appear to use AII as a neurotransmitter in projections to hypothalamic cells that are involved in the control of fl uid dynamics. In this example, activation of hypothalamic systems that elicit drinking and reduce fl uid excretion at the kidneys would produce the adaptive compensatory homeostatic increase in blood pressure. Further details on the components of the regulatory system are provided in Chapter 36.Different populations of hypothalamic neurons elicit adaptive responses to changes in fl uid osmolarity. Osmosensitive neurons are located primarily in the AV3V region, which includes the OVLT. The response of these neurons to alterations in fl uid osmolarity elicits an adaptive compensatory thirst. The neural circuitry that modulates this response is not fully understood but is known to involve input from the OVLT, SFO, and NTS. Further, it takes advantage of the same output regulatory pathway, hypothalamic magnocellular neurons, utilized by the SFO. Chapter 39 considers the hypothalamic role in fl uid homeostasis in greater detail.The consumption of food is another complex behavior that involves several regions of the brain. The hypothalamus plays an essential role in this circuitry as an integrative center for a variety of sensory stimuli, both synaptic and hormonal. It also serves to modulate autonomic outfl ow to the viscera. This modern view of neural regulation of food intake is a substantial modifi cation of the simple concept of opposing centers for hunger and satiety that was popular in the older literature. Chapter 38 contains a detailed discussion of literature that has contributed to the modern view of the neural control of food intake. The following descrip-tion summarizes the functional organization of hypothalamic nuclei that regulate food intake.When food is consumed, hormones are released from the viscera, and sensory pathways innervating the alimentary tract are stimulated. These sensory pathways regulate neurons in the area postrema and NTS that are connected bidirectionally with hypothalamic nuclei. Hypothalamic nuclei are also subject to feedback regulation from hormonal signals arising in the gut. At least four hypothalamic nuclei are involved in the control of feeding, and a prominent part of their infl uence is exerted via descending projections to autonomic nuclei in the brain stem and spinal cord. Paraventricular nuclei provide a prominent descending hypothalamic infl uence. In particular, parvicellular oxytocinergic neurons in the PVH provide an important descending projection to the dorsal vagal complex (including the NTS) and the sympathetic preganglionic neurons of the thoracic spinal cord. At least some of this descending infl uence appears to be under the control of neuropeptide Y (NPY)-containing neurons that project from the arcuate nucleus to the PVH. In experiments, infusion of NPY into the PVH stimulates food intake and NPY-containing neurons in the arcuate nucleus are inhibited by insulin released into the peripheral circulation after a meal and by leptin, a peptide released from adipose tissue. Thus, hypothalamic nuclei regulate food intake through the autonomic nervous system, and a subset of these neurons is infl uenced by peripheral signals from the periphery (see Chapter 38).It is clear that the hypothalamus plays a pivotal regulatory role central to the survival and propagation of vertebrate species. This regulation is achieved by output pathways that utilize both synaptic and hormonal mechanisms and is subject to feedback regulation by sensory information derived from the systems that they regulate. The integrative capacities of the hypothalamus are fundamental to its ability to orchestrate the complex and diverse adaptive behaviors that underlie homeostasis, reproduction of the species, and motivated behaviors. Within this context it is important to view the hypothalamus as an integral component of ensembles of neurons devoted to specifi c functions rather than an individual unit. Swanson has advanced a conceptual framework consistent with this philosophy. In this formulation, the hypothalamus is part of a "behavioral control column" that functions as a topographically organized integrative center subject to the control of cerebral hemispheres. The functional organization of this column is consistent with the distributed localization of functions classically associated with the hypothalamus. For example, the rostral portion of the column is devoted to the control of ingestive (eating and drinking) and social (defensive and reproductive) behaviors, whereas the caudal portion, which is continuous with the substantia nigra, functions in support of exploration and foraging. Modulation of these functions is under the control of the cerebral hemispheres through three descending projections involving the cortex, striatum, and pallidum. The role of the hypothalamus in imparting temporal organization on the behavioral state and physiology is an important component of this organizational framework. The explosion of organizational and functional data that has accumulated over recent decades has expanded our understanding of hypothalamic function and established this small but complex subdivision of the diencephalon as an important integrative unit for the expression of behavior and maintenance of homeostasis.The autonomic nervous system (ANS) consists of the neural circuitry that controls the body's physiology. This network is a morphologically, embryologically, functionally, and pharmacologically distinct division of the nervous system. Working in concert with neuroendocrine mechanisms, the ANS is responsible for homeostasis.Unlike the skeletal motor system, which innervates striated muscles, the autonomic nervous system innervates the body's smooth muscle organs and tissues. The ANS projects to, and forms plexuses within, the hollow organs, or viscera, such as the heart and lungs in the thorax, and the gastrointestinal, genital, and urinary tracts in the abdomen. It also projects to the blood vessels, glands, and other target tissues found within trunk muscles, limb muscles, and skin.The ANS coordinates what Walter B. Cannon (1939) referred to as the "wisdom of the body"; specifi cally it provides the tissue-, organ-, and system-level integration of the body's physiology to achieve homeostasis and support behavior. In tandem with endocrine controls, the ANS orchestrates the continuous adjustments in blood chemistry, respiration, circulation, digestion, reproductive status, and immune responses that protect the integrity of the internal milieu and enable the functioning and coordination of skeletal muscles and exteroceptive senses into what we know as behavior. Autonomic adjustments are often phasic responses that occur with latencies typical of neural refl exes; in contrast, endocrine responses usually occur more slowly, taking anywhere from minutes to hours to seasons for full expression.Autonomic impairments lead to the loss of ability to mobilize physiological responses and adaptations to challenges to homeostasis. For example, , in his landmark physiological experiments on the ANS, found that destruction of different autonomic pathways devastated the ability of an animal to regulate its body temperature, to respond to perturbations of its fl uid and electrolyte balance, to control its blood sugar homeostasis, or to mobilize in response to threats.A familiar experience illustrates autonomic operations: Occasionally, when you have been lying down resting and then jump up suddenly, you may feel dizzy, your vision may become blurred, and you may momentarily have trouble maintaining your balancelet alone doing something active and coordinated. This phenomenon is postural, or orthostatic, hypotension and is caused by insuffi cient oxygenated blood reaching your brain under the altered hemodynamic conditions produced by the rapid change in posture. Most people experience postural hypotension only occasionally, though for some it is a chronic medical problem. Indeed, it is a debilitating condition in people with various forms of dysautonomia The principle underscored by postural hypotension is that even something as mundane as a change in posture requires a near-instantaneous redistribution of Fundamental Neuroscience, Third Edition VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS blood fl ow throughout the body to protect the privileged fl ow of blood, and thus oxygen and glucose, to the brain. The demands of postural adjustments require unceasing monitoring and rebalancing of circulatory loads. The fact that these adjustments happen continuously and automatically is testimony to the effi ciency of the ANS in producing homeostatic adjustments. This example also illustrates two other characteristics of many autonomic responses: (1) Often the responses either are initiated in anticipation of the perturbation or implemented so rapidly that the individual does not experience a defi cit and (2) the activity of the ANS is linked to and coordinated with activity of the somatic nervous system.The range of autonomic functions is hard to overemphasize. They are by no means limited to cardiovascular and metabolic operations, to "fi ght or fl ight" situations, or to short-term adjustments. The ANS has equally essential roles, for example, in all reproductive behavior and physiology, including the choreographies of copulation, gestation, parturition, and lactation. Autonomic refl exes control, on a continuous basis, all bodily interfaces with the environment (e.g., the dermal, respiratory, and digestive epithelia). And the ANS plays critical roles in immune system responses; it also coordinates the elimination of metabolic waste products.The autonomous nature of ANS function is another characteristic of autonomic control. We are rarely aware of ongoing refl ex adjustments made to maintain cardiovascular and regulatory dynamics, fl uid and electrolyte homeostasis, energy balance, immune system operations, and our reproductive functions. Like the batch fi les of a computer, which execute without normally intruding on the screen or requiring attention, the autonomic refl ex adjustments run unceasingly in the "background," whereas other sensory events and functional decisions occupy the "foreground." In one of his delightful and trenchant essays, Lewis The hub of the autonomic nervous system is the visceral motor outfl ow, which is divided into sympathetic (SNS) and parasympathetic (PSNS) divisions. Each division is organized hierarchically into pre-and postganglionic levels ( ganglia containing the somata of the postganglionic motor neurons in the periphery are distinguishing features of the two principal divisions of the autonomic nervous system Energy Expenditure, Catabolic Functions, and Adjustments for Intense Activity "Fight or fl ight," Cannon's prototypical example, epitomizes the operation of the sympathetic division of the ANS: You are walking alone at night in an unfamiliar part of town. Although the area is somewhat unsafe and it is too dark to see much of your surroundings, the night is quiet, and you manage to relax. After walking for several minutes, however, there is a sudden, loud, and unfamiliar noise close by and behind you. In literally the time of a heart beat or two, your physiology moves into high gear. Your heart races; your blood pressure rises. Blood vessels in your skeletal muscles dilate, increasing the fl ow of oxygen and energy. At the same time, blood vessels in your gastrointestinal tract and skin constrict, making more blood available to be shunted to skeletal muscle. Digestion is inhibited; release of glucose from the liver is facilitated. Your pupils dilate, improving vision. You begin to sweat, a response serving several functions, including promoting additional dissipation of heat so muscles can work effi ciently. Multiple other smooth and cardiac muscle adjustments occur automatically and almost all of them are affected by the sympathetic division of the ANS.This fi ght-or-fl ight example illustrates important features of the ANS generally and its SNS division more particularly. First, the situation points out the utility of the housekeeping functions of the ANS: If the alarming noise turns out to be a threat and it is necessary to fi ght or fl ee, skeletal muscles must be optimally tuned and provisioned. Extra quantities of oxygen and energy are essential. Second, the synergy of adjustments indicates a coordinated and adaptive program of responses, which in this case happen immediately, almost before cognitive evaluation. Third, the short latency of the response is characteristic (and in such a case possibly critical). Some of the physiological adjustments could be accomplished by hormonal mechanisms, but such adjustments would be too slow to be of much immediate help if the noise should signal a bona fi de threat.Though the fl ight-or-fi ght scenario highlights shortlatency responses, not all sympathetic (or parasympathetic) responses happen on such short time scales. ANS operations also involve continuous, ongoing adjustments. Textbook accounts of the emergency functions of the ANS and of single, isolated refl ex adjustments sometimes leave the incorrect impression that the ANS is quiescent in the absence of a threat or specifi c stimulus. Instead, the autonomic nervous system, like the somatic nervous system, always maintains an operating tone. Even during rest, the system maintains appropriate homeostatic balances and autonomic programs.  Sympathetic preganglionic neurons occupy the intermediolateral nucleus, a columnar grouping of cells running longitudinally through much of the spinal cord, in the lateral horn of the spinal gray. In humans, these cells are found between the fi rst thoracic spinal segment (T1) and the third lumbar segment (L3) Sympathetic postganglionic neurons are found in two distinct types of peripheral ganglia: paravertebral and prevertebral. Paravertebral ganglia, as the name implies, are adjacent to the spinal cord bilaterally, in a position slightly ventral and lateral to the vertebral column Paravertebral ganglia of the sympathetic chain supply the postganglionic innervation of the head, thorax, trunk, and limbs. For the trunk and limbs, postganglionic axons course both alongside and within the somatic peripheral nerve innervating the region. These autonomic fi bers innervate the blood vessels in the muscles (vasoconstrictor fi bers), as well as different targets within the skin, including the sweat glands (sudomotor fi bers) and erector pili muscles of erectile hairs (pilomotor fi bers).At the rostral end of the sympathetic chain, individual segmental ganglia are fused into aggregate The SNS is organized segmentally. As illustrated here for segments T3 and T4 of the thoracic spinal cord, preganglionic axons exit through the ventral root of the segment in which the preganglionic cell body is located. These preganglionic axons can be myelinated (solid red lines) or unmyelinated (dashed red lines) and can project to the paravertebral ganglion associated with the segment, to neighboring paravertebral ganglia through the sympathetic chain, to postganglionic neurons located distally in the prevertebral ganglia, or through one of the autonomic nerves (splanchnic nerve is illustrated). T3 and T4, segments of the thoracic spinal cord; VH, ventral horn of spinal cord. From Unlike the trunk, limbs, head, heart, and lungs, organs of the abdominal cavity are innervated by postganglionic neurons in ganglia situated distal to both the spinal cord and the paravertebral sympathetic chain in locations closer to the target tissue. These sites give the ganglia their distinguishing name, prevertebral ganglia. The preganglionic neurons innervating these sets of postganglionic neurons are located in the intermediolateral column of the spinal cord, like those innervating the paravertebral chain, but their axons pass through the white rami, the chain ganglia, and the gray rami without synapsing. They then make contact with the peripherally situated prevertebral ganglion cells There are four major prevertebral postganglionic stations. The more rostral three are located at points where major abdominal arteries separate from the descending aorta, and the ganglia take their names from their associated arteries The adrenal medulla is a unique variant of the sympathetic postganglionic pattern. By several criteria, the adrenal medulla is a sympathetic prevertebral ganglion containing postganglionics. However, neurons of this medullary ganglion, rather than issuing axons to innervate target organs, function as a neuroendocrine organ. The adrenal medulla secretes the classical postganglionic sympathetic transmitter norepinephrine, as well as epinephrine, directly into the bloodstream. These catecholamines then circulate as hormones. Release of catecholamines from the adrenals during sympathetic activation provides powerful reinforcement and modulation of the more focal release of catecholamines at traditional-and local-effector sites.Overall, the two major motor outfl ows, or divisions, of the ANS are responsible for the maintenance of homeostasis, but the sympathetic nervous system is the branch specialized for the mobilization of energy. The SNS provides the vascular, glandular, metabolic, and other physiological adjustments that optimize behavioral responses, particularly in emergency situations and conditions requiring activity. The SNS efferent outfl ow consists of preganglionic neurons, which are located in the intermediolateral column of the thoracic and lumbar spinal cord. SNS efferent axons course to paravertebral and prevertebral ganglia containing the postganglionic neurons, the axons of these postganglionic neurons project to the target tissues.Functionally, the parasympathetic nervous system mobilizes homeostatic adjustments that are often opposite and reciprocal to those activated by the SNS (see One of the features distinguishing the PSNS from the SNS is the location of their respective preganglionic neurons. PSNS preganglionic neurons are located in two longitudinal columns of neurons: one in the brain stem and the other in the sacral spinal cord. These locations of PSNS preganglionic neurons are responsible for the alternative name of this division of the ANS, the craniosacral (or bulbosacral) division. The longitudinal column of motor neurons in the brain stem is the general visceral cell column, which condenses into a number of nuclei ventrolateral to the cerebral aqueduct system within the brain. These nuclei then project through cranial nerves to targets in the head (cranial nerves III, VII, and IX) or thorax and abdomen (cranial nerve X) Preganglionic motor neurons of the Xth cranial nerve, the vagus nerve, control smooth muscles and glands throughout the digestive tract, from the pharynx to the distal colon, including viscera such as the liver and pancreas. These Xth nerve neurons occupy the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, a long fusiform nucleus in the medulla oblongata Autonomic innervation of the head by both sympathetic (superior cervical ganglion) and parasympathetic (cranial nerve nuclei in the medulla and midbrain projecting to the several prevertebral ganglia) pathways. Visceral afferents associated with the autonomic nervous system are found in the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) ganglion. From The parasympathetic nervous system or craniosacral division (i.e., the second major outfl ow of the ANS) is organized to digest, assimilate, and conserve energy as well as promote rest. Its anabolic functions include not only those associated with the metabolism of nutrients, but also numerous protective refl exes, such as those that limit heat loss, reduce energy expenditure, and slow the heart. The PSNS outfl ow consists of preganglionic neurons located in brain stem cranial nerve nuclei or the autonomic columns of the sacral spinal cord. Their axons project to the postganglionic neurons located in ganglia situated near or in the target organs. Postganglionic neurons, in turn, project to the smooth muscle of the target viscera. Descending colon Rectum Urinary bladder Sexual organs Pelvic splanchnic nerve thetic neurons, motor neurons of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and the nucleus ambiguus are organized into viscerotopic subnuclei (e.g., The central representation of the more caudal part of the PSNS is found in the sacral spinal cord, in humans the second (S2) through fourth (S4) sacral segments ( The locations of their respective postganglionic neurons constitute another feature that distinguishes the PSNS from the SNS. Ganglia containing the PSNS postganglionic neurons are juxtaposed to, on the surface of, or even in, the target organ, in contrast to the para-and prevertebral locations of the SNS Discussions of the ANS sometimes focus on the SNS and PSNS, but there is a third division as well. When Langley articulated the classic defi nition of the ANS, he identifi ed the enteric nervous system (ENS) as the third division. The alimentary canal, or "entrum," and the tissues derived from it, such as those in the pancreas and liver, contain extensive and well-formed neural networks. In particular, the gastrointestinal tract contains two well-organized major plexuses that contain as many neurons as the entire spinal cord The number of neurons in the enteric plexuses, their extensive interconnections, and their capacity to support motility have led to proposals that the enteric nervous system serves as a more or less independent "brain" in the gut. Early descriptions emphasized the autonomy of the ENS by observing that the gastrointestinal tract could exhibit movement, peristalsis, even after all extrinsic connections to it were cut. However, fully integrated or coordinated responses of the gastrointestinal tract, including motor responses other than peristalsis, as well as absorptive and secretory responses, involve extrinsic projections from the central nervous system to the enteric nervous system.Because the preganglionic neurons of the vagus nerve project to the enteric ganglia rather than to independent postganglionic stations, the enteric nervous system serves as an extensive postganglionic relay station for the vagus.The ENS or enteric nervous system, the third division of the ANS, consists of ganglia and plexuses of intrinsic neurons in the walls of the viscera such as the gastrointestinal tract. These nerve networks contain intrinsic afferents, interneurons, and efferents that control local functions; they also receive extrinsic inputs from autonomic preganglionic efferents, particularly those PSNS projections coursing in the vagus nerve.Early in the twentieth century, pharmacological studies performed with naturally occurring agonists and antagonists provided the basis for the original differentiation of two major ANS divisions-the SNS and PSNS. Prior to the pharmacological analyses, the two often had been lumped together. Dale (the contributor of "Dale's law" of neurotransmitters), Langley, and a number of other early investigators applied natural extracts such as muscarine, nicotine, d-tubocurarine, and others to autonomic ganglia while measuring responses in order to infer the chemical taxonomy of the ANS. Subsequent experiments have replicated the basic distinctions made by these investigators, but this newer research, with access to a pharmacopoeia of synthetic agonists and antagonists, as well as to immunocytochemistry for the characterization of transmitter substances, has described a much richer and more complicated multiplicity of neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, and receptor subtypes in autonomic nerves Most preganglionic neurons of both the SNS and PSNS have a cholinergic transmitter phenotype. Only FIGURE 35.9 (A) The enteric nervous system plexuses in the wall of the intestine. Enteric neurons form two conspicuous and extensive networks, or plexuses, of ganglia and connectives located between the longitudinal and circular muscle layers of the wall (the myenteric plexus) and the circular muscle layer and the inner mucosal layer (the submucous plexus). The deep muscular plexus, periglandular plexus, and villous plexus are additional networks of enteric neurons and their processes. From The respective transmitter phenotypes of the postganglionic neurons constitute one of the cardinal defi ning differences between the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system. The majority of SNS postganglionic neurons release the transmitter norepinephrine, whereas PSNS postganglionic neurons release primarily acetylcholine. Such a two-transmitter chemical code produces push-pull or positive bidirectional control of individual targets.The biomechanics of smooth muscle are quite different from the biomechanics of striated muscle. In contrast to skeletal muscle, smooth muscle is not always organized into antagonistic pairs, with each member of the pair being innervated by a different motor neuron. Also, the smooth (and cardiac) muscles forming the walls of the viscera are not differentially attached to a hard frame to provide mechanical leverage through opposal activity. Reciprocal motor programs of the viscera, for the most part, involve active, phased contraction and relaxation of the same muscle to achieve coordination. To produce these patterns of excitation and inhibition, the target organs and tissues express both adrenergic and cholinergic receptors and have different, often antagonistic or complementary, responses to selective activation of the different receptors.Response patterns of smooth muscle are further differentiated by specializations of the receptors. Adrenergic receptors, infl uenced by the catecholaminergic transmitter released by sympathetic fi bers, are differentiated into at least four different metabotropic subtypes linked to different intracellular pathways. Similarly, the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, infl uenced by the cholinergic transmitter released by parasympathetic postganglionic neurons, is differentiated into at least three ionotropic subtypes with differential infl uences on intracellular transduction. These heterogeneities of transmitter species and receptor types make it practical to mobilize multiple, different, and potentially highly differentiated responses from one effector tissue (Box 35.1).Response selection may also be facilitated by neuropeptides that the postganglionic neurons synthesize and corelease during activity. Somatostatin, neuropeptide Y, or both are found in many sympathetic neurons; vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and calcitonin gene-related peptide are often coexpressed in parasympathetic neurons. These peptides may serve as neuromodulators that vary postsynaptic responses to the conventional autonomic neurotransmitters. The release of different neuropeptides and cotransmitters can vary with different rates or patterns of fi ring and is not invariantly proportional to transmitter release. Thus, a heterogeneity of different cotransmitter and transmitter release patterns can be produced by a single fi ber or fi ber type, depending on fi ring pattern and other local factors at the synapse (e.g., Although dual innervation in an oppositional or push-pull pattern is presumed to yield faster, more responsive adjustments and to provide a mechanism that can adjust response gain, some tissues are innervated by only one arm of the ANS. The SNS has a wider distribution than the PSNS. In particular, white and brown adipose tissue, peripheral blood vessels, and sweat glands are innervated by the SNS without reciprocal PSNS projections. One possible explanation for this arrangement is that the functions of these particular effectors do not require the speed associated with push-pull projection patterns, particularly in terminating responses once activated. Furthermore, in the evolution of the autonomic nervous system, the SNS is thought to be the older, and correspondingly more extensive, network, whereas the PSNS occurred more recently in phylogeny and therefore has less widespread projections.Finally, the enteric nervous system also has an extensively varied set of transmitters, cotransmitters, and neuromodulators, providing highly differentiated chemical coding of local functions Both the SNS and the PSNS use acetylcholine as a preganglionic transmitter, but they are distinguished by different postganglionic phenotypes: most SNS Transmitter phenotypes of autonomic neurons generally seem fi xed, dictated by both intrinsic and extrinsic developmental cues. At least some ANS neurons, however, can alter their phenotypes under appropriate environmental conditions. This conclusion fi rst was reached when populations of postmitotic adrenergic and cholinergic neurons were cocultured in vitro in different media or in the presence of different tissues. Without changes in overall cell number, the percentages of adrenergic and cholinergic neurons in a given culture changed over time. Even more defi nitively, when single postganglionic cells were grown in microculture wells, the presence of a medium conditioned by heart cells caused some of these mature neurons to change from an adrenergic to a cholinergic phenotype . This phenotypic switching does not appear to be an artifact of cell culture situations; the change appears to occur normally in vivo in development to generate the specialized minority of sympathetic postganglionic neurons that are cholinergic (e.g., for innervation of sweat glands). Such changes in transmitter are not unique to these examples. Perhaps refl ecting pluripotential patterns seen earlier in phylogeny, at least some cholinergic neurons (e.g., avian ciliary ganglion cells) appear to remodel into an adrenergic phenotype, whereas other cells (e.g., maturing neural crest cells in the developing gut wall) exhibit a transient catecholaminergic stage that is lost during the ingrowth of extramural innervation.Finally, in addition to such switching, autonomic postganglionic neurons also have been shown to exhibit plasticity in altering their levels of transmitters and cotransmitters as a function of the activity of their preganglionic inputs. For example, after preganglionic inputs are blocked or transected pharmacologically, postganglionic neurons of the superior cervical ganglion decrease their levels of tyrosine hydroxylase while increasing their level of substance P.  The "self-governing" or autonomic characteristic that gives its name to the ANS is based largely on refl exes that involve more than peripheral efferent pathways. Though the early history of autonomic neuroscience emphasized this motor outfl ow, homeostasis is maintained through the cross-coupling and coordination of multiple refl ex arcs. These refl exes involve afferent inputs as well as efferent outputs.Two major infl ows of visceral, or autonomic, afferents (Box 35.2) establish the input arms of the basic refl ex arcs. These visceral afferents also provide critical cross-linked feedback between the sympathetic and the parasympathetic outfl ows, keeping them in balance. For example, sympathetic activity can increase heart rate (tachycardia) and produce constriction of vascular beds, thus leading to an increase in blood pressure. This increase in blood pressure, in turn, is detected by vagus nerve baroreceptors in the aortic arch and other sites. Visceral afferents in the vagus can A long-standing dispute about terminology still infl uences discussions of autonomic refl exes. Some authors (and textbooks) adhere to the original autonomic classification of Langley, who considered the ANS a motor system without a corresponding sensory infl ow. This classic view acknowledges that autonomic effectors are infl uenced by afferents but considers visceral afferents, as well as somatic afferents, as independent of the ANS. Conversely, other scientists (and textbooks) consider afferents arising in and associated with the viscera as the necessary counterpart to autonomic efferents and label them autonomic afferents.The controversy goes back to Langley's concentration on a pharmacological defi nition of the ANS. In his initial studies, Langley speculated about the existence of autonomic afferents, but was unable to fi nd a neurochemical marker to distinguish visceral from somatic afferents. He sidelined the issue pending more information (his seminal book is subtitled Part I), focused his studies on efferents, and never returned to the search for an afferent marker (Part II never appeared). Adherents to his original motoronly classifi cation stress that somatic and visceral afferents can elicit autonomic responses and that both classes of afferents elicit somatic responses, as well.However, advocates for including visceral afferents within the autonomic schema argue that these afferents innervate the target tissues of the ANS efferents, share similar embryological histories with autonomic efferents, course in the same peripheral nerves as the autonomic efferents (e.g., the vagus), and form mono-and oligosynaptic refl ex arcs infl uencing autonomic preganglionic neurons. These proponents for revision of the autonomic terminology also point out that more recent analyses have identifi ed neuropeptide markers shared by visceral afferents (but not somatic afferents) and autonomic motor neurons. This more inclusive view of the autonomic nervous system seems to be gaining ground. It works more naturally for the discussion of refl exes, and we have adopted it in this text. then refl exively stimulate vagal parasympathetic efferents that slow heart rate (bradycardia). The visceral afferents monitoring the effects of autonomic activity produce positive, reciprocal, and dynamic regulation of physiological responses. When a more sustained adjustment in blood pressure is required (e.g., in the general arousal of the fi ght-or-fl ight response discussed earlier), these outfl ows are adjusted centrally in a process akin to the a-g linkage so that sympathetic activation is not nullifi ed by parasympathetic responses damping the needed activation.In the case of the sympathetic nervous system, motor neurons receive direct afferent input from most of the autonomic targets. The cell bodies of these primary afferents are located in the dorsal root ganglia of the spinal cord segment(s) in which the corresponding preganglionic neurons are located Visceral afferent nerves relay sensory information about visceral volume, pressure, contents, or nocioceptive stimuli to spinal centers, where automatic responses are interpreted and functional responses are generated.In the parasympathetic limb of the ANS, there are two major afferent infl ows with different organization.  Most of the visceral afferents associated with cranial nerve autonomic refl exes terminate in the extensive nucleus of the solitary tract, which is located immediately dorsal to the general visceral column of the brain stem. Specifi cally, afferents of VII, IX, and X all end in the nucleus of the solitary tract. These inputs form a viscerotopy in the nucleus, with facial gustatory information projecting most rostrally and medially, the glossopharyngeal information somewhat more caudally, and the afferents of the different branches of the vagus nerve terminating most caudally in different subnuclei of the nucleus of the solitary tract. As the largest and most complex of the visceral afferent relays in the brain, the nucleus of the solitary tract also receives afferent inputs from the spinal division of the trigeminal nerve and second-order inputs from the dorsal column nuclei.Like visceral afferents associated with the SNS, visceral afferents associated with the PSNS contain SP and other tachykinins. In addition, several neuropeptides found in the gut are also found in some of these afferents. For example, the gut hormone and neuropeptide cholecystokinin (CCK) is found in vagal afferents relaying information from the gastrointestinal tract to the brain. CCK is also found in higher order ascending relays of vagal projections in the neuraxis, leading some to argue that CCK provides chemical coding for visceral afferents associated with the gastrointestinal tract.The second major infl ow of afferents to the parasympathetic limb of the ANS is associated with the sacral division. Visceral afferents in this division are organized much like the spinal afferents associated with the thoracolumbar or sympathetic division of the ANS (e.g., At the central relays of autonomic refl ex arcs, the thoracolumbar circuitry of sympathetic refl exes and the craniosacral circuitry of parasympathetic responses have similar morphological elements. The SNS motor neurons preferentially distribute their dendrites within the long longitudinally oriented column that constitutes the intermediolateral nucleus of the spinal cord. The neurons also distribute a subset of their dendrites dorsolaterally in an arch that brings the dendrites into contact with the incoming visceral afferents (e.g., In addition to forming conventional refl ex circuits throughout the ANS, at least some visceral afferents support effector responses known as an axon refl exes. Unlike a conventional refl ex, which typically involves an afferent neuron, at least one central nervous system synapse, and an efferent neuron, axon refl exes involve only the afferent neuron and they occur in the target tissue-without a CNS relay. The phenomenon can be seen clearly in the type of experiment that was instrumental in establishing the existence of axon refl exes. If all motor axons projecting to a target tissue are eliminated by surgery or other appropriate means while sparing the afferent innervation of the site, the afferent axons can be stimulated selectively. When the afferent axons are stimulated such that their peripheral processes innervating the target are invaded antidromically, one can measure an effector response or assay the release of a neuropeptide from the peripheral afferent neurite. Such experiments performed on a variety of different visceral and cutaneous afferent systems have demonstrated that axon refl exes produce a number of infl ammatory and vascular effector responses When a peripheral ending of a visceral afferent transduces a stimulus, the resulting action potential can release the neuropeptide contained in vesicles in that ending The architecture of visceral afferents that produce axon refl exes. Visceral and cutaneous afferents release transmitters from the tachykinin family. When action potentials (indicated by arrows) are generated peripherally, they are propagated centrally. Peripherally generated action potentials also produce a local release of tachykinins in the affected terminals and in terminals of the peripheral collaterals. From produce local changes on smooth muscle-a local, or peripheral, axon refl ex. The response is also relayed to neighboring tissues. When an action potential is transmitted centrally in an afferent axon, it can also be transmitted centrifugally by collaterals of the same fi ber, and release of the neuromodulator from these collateral endings can propagate the refl ex in the immediate area. The infl ammatory responses and extravasation associated with the classic "wheal and fl are" reaction to skin damage were the fi rst axon refl exes analyzed and are a classic illustration of the phenomenon. Such local responses have been widely documented not only in the skin, but also in viscera such as the lungs. Finally, visceral afferents, particularly those associated with SNS pathways, are responsible for visceral pain Visceral afferents innervate the target tissues of the ANS, and their axons frequently course in the same peripheral nerves as autonomic efferents. Also commonly called autonomic afferents, these sensory elements associated with the ANS constitute the afferent limbs of autonomic refl exes and carry the inputs recognized as visceral pain. Visceral afferents also mediate axon refl exes and are cross-linked with somatic, as well as autonomic, nervous system activity.Homeostasis no more occurs through isolated autonomic refl exes than posture is maintained, or movement is executed, through isolated somatic refl exes. Nevertheless, methodological and historical considerations have yielded a tendency to focus on individual autonomic refl exes. Methodologically, the need for experimental control typically dictates that experiments isolate a refl ex (or small set of refl exes) for examination. In addition, historically, the ANS was conceptualized primarily as a motor branch of the peripheral nervous system.Though the separate-refl ex perspective shapes a view of ANS functions as a collection of individual motor responses, autonomic activity typically involves fi nely coordinated, fully integrated adjustments of multiple outfl ows. Just as somatic posture and movement are coordinated by supraspinal CNS controls, autonomic integration is achieved by supraspinal controls. The preganglionic motor pools of the craniosacral and thoracolumbar outfl ows are fi nal common paths for descending projections from the CNS. Similarly, the fi rst-and second-order visceral afferent relays (e.g., the nucleus of the solitary tract and the spinal lamina V), which form short, mono-, or oligosynaptic refl ex arcs with these preganglionic motor pools, are targets of rostral CNS stations that coordinate and modulate the autonomic outfl ows.The CNS coordination of autonomic activity achieves a number of integrative functions:• Much like the suprasegmental organization of skeletal motor responses, central ANS stations provide coordination and sequencing of different local autonomic refl exes. These stations provide, for example, the efferent choreography necessary to coordinate the sequential autonomic responses in the mouth, stomach, intestines, and pancreas during and after a meal. Such programs coordinate brain stem and spinal cord efferents, as well as refl exes within the SNS and PSNS divisions of the autonomic outfl ow.• Central ANS circuitry also cross-links autonomic activity and somatic motor activity. The example used earlier of cardiovascular adjustments occurring in concert with postural adjustments illustrates such linkage between autonomic and somatic nervous system outfl ows.• The CNS stations of the autonomic nervous system also provide the information, as well as the organization and planning, that enables an organism to mobilize autonomic adjustments or responses in anticipation of environmental contingencies and developing needs. For example, both fl uid and energy homeostasis involve physiological adjustments in anticipation of major imbalances or defi cits, responses that cannot be explained solely by reactive refl exes.The importance and the nature of central autonomic controls are underscored by clinical disorders that result from interruptions in the connections between the central autonomic circuitry and the preganglionic motor neurons (Box 35.3). Quadriplegia and paraplegia, which result from injuries that divide the separate thoracic and lumbar sympathetic loops and sacral parasympathetic pathways from higher central regions, illustrate how essential these longitudinal connections are. Interruption of the longitudinal connections causes loss of voluntary bladder and bowel control. Disruption of the spinal cord also causes men to become impotent because penile tumescence is a predominantly parasympathetic response and ejaculation is a sympathetic response. Although erections can occasionally be elicited as local refl exes caused by directThe importance of the autonomic nervous system to health often goes unnoticed. When ANS functions operate normally, they typically occur automatically, without the individual being aware of any adjustments. Nevertheless, loss of an autonomic response can be disruptive, and autonomic disorders can be debilitating Some autonomic disorders are less conspicuous. In part, the apparently more subtle defi cits may be ones that are less important in the carefully controlled environments found in modern societies. For example, impaired thermoregulatory responses may be tolerated well by a person living in a climate-controlled environment. Also, metabolic emergencies are unlikely to occur and need autonomic compensation if a person regularly eatsenough food. Nevertheless, autonomic disorders occasion a number of serious, even life-threatening, health problems.Autonomic imbalances can take many different forms. Excess activation of the ANS is implicated in various stress-related disorders, including ulcers, colitis, high blood pressure, and heart attacks. As discussed earlier, chronic failure of autonomic cardiovascular homeostasis can cause debilitating postural hypotension. Developmental autonomic disorders, such as immature or anomalous medullary respiratory circuitry, are thought to contribute to sudden infant death syndrome. Some sleep disorders, such as sleep apnea, are also thought to have autonomic elements. Furthermore, widespread autonomic dysfunction resulting from autonomic neuropathies of diabetes, alcoholism, and Parkinson's disease complicates the primary diseases. Autonomic disturbances can also underlie metabolic disorders, such as stress-induced diabetes and reactive hypoglycemia. Autonomic disturbances have also been hypothesized to be a cause of obesity.Autonomic function is not only impaired by diseases, it is also compromised by aging processes-even those of healthy aging mechanical stimulation, ejaculations, which require suprasegmental coordination, almost universally disappear. In addition, numerous vascular and glandular refl exes are also disordered by the interruption of long autonomic pathways connecting the brain and spinal cord Like the concept of the ANS itself, the corollary that the ANS includes a hierarchy of central mechanisms was fi rst demonstrated by physiological experiments. Nineteenth-and early twentieth-century experiments manipulating the brain caused autonomic disturbances. In one classical experiment, for example, Claude Bernard demonstrated that localized mechanical lesions, or stab wounds, in the fl oor of the fourth ventricle near the dorsal vagal complex produced a "piqure glycosurique," a disturbance of blood glucose homeostasis characterized by a diabetes-like condition in which glucose spills into the urine. Subsequent lesion and stimulation studies identifi ed a number of "centers" for micturition, respiration, and other autonomic functions in the medulla oblongata and pons.Other experiments implicated the hypothalamus in even more extensively coordinated and cross-linked autonomic patterns. This work led to the concept of the hypothalamus as the "head ganglion" of the autonomic nervous system. Following an earlier application of electrical stimulation to the hypothalamus by Karplus and Kreidl, Walter Hess found that focal electrical stimulation of regions of the hypothalamus elicited coordinated patterns of sympathetic and parasympathetic adjustments (e.g., changes in pupil size, piloerection, and respiration) and affective responses that were appropriate to behavioral responses elicited from the same loci. In fact, central manipulations that affect autonomic function seem practically invariably to produce adjustments of both SNS and PSNS outputs, an observation that underscores the integrative role the brain plays in ANS function.Brain lesions in virtually all limbic system regions, and notably in the septal area, amygdala, hippocampus, frontal cortex, cingulate cortex, and insular cortex, have been shown to exaggerate, dissociate, blunt, or in other ways distort autonomic responses to environmental situations.As neuroscience tracing tools have become more powerful, they have revealed an extensive CNS autonomic control hierarchy coupling visceral afferent inputs with autonomic efferent outfl ows, linking the SNS and PSNS divisions of the ANS, and interconnecting the central autonomic stations with somatic and endocrine pathways in the brain The paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus is a prototype of the extensive and profound central autonomic coordination. Parvocellular neurons in the paraventricular nucleus project monosynaptically to preganglionic neurons in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and preganglionics in the intermediolateral column of the spinal cord. The paraventricular nucleus also projects to the visceral afferent relay nuclei associated with each of these efferent outfl ows (the nucleus of the solitary tract and spinal lamina V, respectively). These descending projections infl uence several cardiovascular and gastrointestinal responses. Illustrating the extent of the central integration of responses, additional neurons of the paraventricular nucleus control corticotropin-releasing factor and oxytocin neuron responses, which often are activated or modulated in association with autonomic functions.Most mesencephalic, diencephalic, and telencephalic nuclei considered part of the limbic system affect visceral motor outfl ows and are now included in the concept of the central visceromotor system. In addition to the central gray and paramedian regions of the mesencephalon and the entire hypothalamus, including the preoptic hypothalamus, these limbic sites include the amygdala, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, septal region, hippocampus, cingulate cortex, orbital frontal cortex, and insular and rhinal cortexes.Multiple subcortical and diencephalic structures impose special controls over the ANS. This network of hierarchically organized central stations, many of them part of the limbic system, forms a central visceral neuroaxis that receives inputs from visceral afferents and issues descending projections to the ANS preganglionic neurons in the brain stem and spinal cord. This central autonomic circuitry organizes and sequences sets of separate autonomic refl exes, coordinates SNS and PSNS responses so that they are synergistic, crosslinks autonomic and skeletal responses, and integrates autonomic activity with ongoing and anticipated behavior of the individual.Our understanding of the autonomic nervous system is incomplete and evolving, driven by the technological advances in neuroscience. Molecular biology, immunocytochemistry, electron microscopy, and otherThe autonomic nervous system participates in emotion and motivation. Consider the fi ght-or-fl ight example that Cannon used in his characterizations of autonomic adjustments and that was discussed earlier in this chapter: The somatic and autonomic adjustments in this emergency situation contain elements we associate with anger or fear. The central relays, including the limbic circuitry just discussed, organize the autonomic components of these responses to external environmental stimuli and coordinate them with the appropriate somatic responses. Thus, the central ANS circuitry is involved in the expression of emotional reactions. This central circuitry has been called the "emotional motor system."Some have hypothesized that in addition to being involved in the expression of emotions, the ANS is the substrate for the experience of emotions. The classic theory of this type was suggested over a century ago independently by James and Lange, who speculated that afferent experience resulting from autonomic adjustments might be the basis of emotional experiences. For the fi ght-orfl ight example, the James-Lange idea could be considered the proposition that "you do not run because you are afraid; you are afraid because you run (and mobilize the requisite autonomic adjustments)." Cannon, in the early twentieth century, offered an infl uential refutation of the James-Lange theory and delayed general acceptance of these ideas, but most of his argument was based on nowoutmoded ideas about the ANS and on a lack of distinction between expression and experience.In an experiment designed to examine the JamesLange idea,  surveyed army veterans who had sustained spinal cord injuries at different levels. Consistent with a prediction of the theory, Hohmann found that, for the veterans' self-reported experiences of both fear and anger, the higher their spinal cord lesions (and thus the more of their visceral afferent infl ow that was disconnected from the brain), the greater the reduction in their affective experiences.More recently, extensive observations with neuropsychological analyses of patients with brain damage and spinal injury, with fMRI and other scanning techniques, and with modern electrophysiological techniques combined with tracing, have converged to suggest that emotions or "feelings" are central-specifi cally limbic system-representations of visceral afferent inputs. Recently, in views compatible with the James-Lange account of emotion, , modern techniques are changing the autonomic nervous system defi nition that was derived with the techniques available to Langley and contemporaries at the beginning of the twentieth century. The distinction that sympathetic postganglionic neurons are noradrenergic whereas parasympathetic postganglionics are cholinergic has been blurred by the recognition of nonadrenergic noncholinergic (NANC) neurons, nitric oxide synthetase (NOS)-containing neurons, purinergic synapses, a large number of colocalized and coreleased neuropeptides, postganglionic neurons changing their neurotransmitter phenotypes, and other exceptions that broaden the view developed by Langley's pharmacological studies. The canon that the ANS is strictly a motor system without an afferent counterpart is challenged by many who argue on functional and molecular biological grounds that "visceral afferents" belong to the ANS (Box 35.2).The proposal that functional differences between the SNS and PSNS divisions of the ANS can be attributed to their contrasting patterns of projection (the sympathetic system preganglionics projecting to postganglionics in a one-to-many pattern; the parasympathetic system projecting in a one-to-few pattern) has not been substantiated by modern analyses of divergence The autonomic nervous system is the neural circuitry that maintains homeostasis and health. It is responsible for the physiological adjustments that achieve what Cannon recognized as the "wisdom of the body." With its sophisticated motor repertoire and complexes of refl exes, including local axon refl exes, segmental or oligosynaptic refl exes, and polysynaptic suprasegmental cascades, the ANS continuously adjusts and defends the body's physiology. The importance of these processes was summarized succinctly by The hub of the ANS consists of two separate motor outfl ows, each hierarchically organized with preganglionic neurons stationed in the CNS and postganglionic neurons located in peripheral ganglia. The sympathetic, or thoracolumbar, division facilitates the mobilization of energy, increases catabolism, and promotes physiological responses that support activity, including emergency responses such as "fi ght" or "fl ight." The parasympathetic, or craniosacral, division facilitates conservation of energy, increases anabolism, and supports physiological responses that typically promote rest, digestion, and restoration of body reserves. The adrenergic phenotype of sympathetic postganglionic neurons, the cholinergic phenotype of parasympathetic neurons, and distinguishing complements of neuropeptides and receptor specializations provide neurochemical coding for the two divisions of the ANS. A key peripheral pole-and third distinct division of the ANS-is the enteric nervous system found in the wall of the digestive tract.The motor outfl ows of the ANS are efferent limbs of refl exes triggered by visceral and, in some cases, somatic afferents. These refl ex circuits have secondorder visceral afferent nuclei located adjacent to spinal and medullary nuclei of preganglionic motor neurons (laminae I and V and the nucleus of the solitary tract, respectively).Higher order CNS circuitry, including the hypothalamus, limbic system, and a variety of cortical sites, provides hierarchical control and integration of autonomic refl exes. This hierarchy is responsible for coordinating different autonomic refl exes, integrating autonomic function with somatic activity, and executing response programs that anticipate needs and regulate physiology over more extended time scales than those represented by isolated refl exes. the refl exes, as well as the autonomic component of the responses.Sympathetic or spinal afferent systems initiating somatic and visceral cardiovascular refl exes are stimulated by nociceptive and non-nociceptive signals. Primary afferents, with cell bodies in dorsal root ganglia, transmit nociceptive signals to the spinal cord through Lissauer's tract to laminae I and V of the dorsal horn gray matter. Fine afferents may contain substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide, somatostatin, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. Spinal pathways ascend one or two segments before crossing to the contralateral side. Through spinothalamic, spinoreticular, spinomesencephalic, and spinosolitary tracts, these systems transmit information to the brain stem and thalamus, ultimately infl uencing autonomic outfl ow to the cardiovascular system, in addition to providing sensory perception. Many cells in these tracts respond to noxious stimuli and are classifi ed as low-threshold, wide dynamic range (most common) and high-threshold (nociceptive). Neurons in the lateral spinothalamic tract ascend to the ventral and ventral posterior lateral thalamus where they mediate discriminative or localization of pain. Neurons in the medial spinothalamic tract projecting to the medial and intralaminar nuclear complex of the thalamus transmit information leading to affective responses, including autonomic adjustments. Cells in the spinoreticular tract respond to chemical (bradykinin) and mechanical (premature beats) stimulation of cardiac ventricular afferents. They project to the gigantocellular tegmental fi eld (paramedian reticular formation) and, to a lesser extent, to the caudal raphe nuclei and magnocellular tegmental fi eld (ventromedial reticular formation), which, in turn, project to the intralaminar region of the thalamus.The medial reticular formation mediates motor responses to visceral (including cardiac) pain and altered sympathetic function through premotor collaterals to spinal intermediolateral column (IML) containing sympathetic preganglionic neurons or through interneurons projecting to other regions, such as the nucleus tractus solitarii (NTS) and rostral ventral lateral medulla (rVLM), concerned with integration of sensory signals that drive autonomic outfl ow. The spinomesencephalic tract sends information to the central periaqueductal gray (PAG, also called the central gray matter) and parabrachial nucleus (PBN) in the rostral pons, and possibly the ventral lateral nucleus of the thalamus. The spinosolitary tract projects to the caudal NTS The IX (glossopharyngeal) and X (vagus) cranial nerves transmit signals from arterial baroreceptors and chemoreceptors, as well as cardiac receptors, including both atrial and ventricular receptors to the CNS. Temporal and spatial integration of sensory information occurs in the CNS, in addition to modification resulting from convergent input from other afferent pathways. Important "cardiovascular" CNS regions that process sensory input include, among others, the NTS, caudal ventral lateral medulla (cVLM), rVLM, PBN, raphe nuclei, and lateral tegmental fi eld (LTF). Other areas in the medulla, hypothalamus, and midbrain identifi ed as important sites of integration include the area postrema, PAG, vestibular region, arcuate nucleus, and paraventricular nucleus. Each region receives input either directly from afferents or, more commonly, through second or higher order interconnections (interneurons) from other nuclei. Each participates in signal conditioning to an extent dictated by the overall input and underlying conditions. Thus, many central autonomic pathways form the anatomical substrate for refl exes involved in cardiovascular regulation. Although these can be separated broadly into CNS regions subserving spinal or sympathetic sensory pathways and regions that integrate visceral vagal afferent input, there is signifi cant overlap of regions that process information from the two systems.The NTS receives direct input from vagal and glossopharyngeal sensory nerves originating in the heart and large arteries (mechano-or baro-and chemosensitive regions). It lies just ventral to the dorsal columns and is divided into the rostral, intermediate, and caudal NTS, relative to the obex. The intermediate NTS contains a central fi ber bundle or solitary tract formed by sensory input from VII, IX, and X cranial nerves. Visceral afferents from the heart, lungs, and gastrointestinal regions project to neurons in the commissural medial NTS. Cardiovascular afferents from the heart and great vessels project to the dorsolateral, medial, and commissural regions of the NTS. Few solitary tract neurons have pulse synchronous activity, possibly due to convergent input from baroreceptor and nonbaroreceptor inputs. Ionotropic glutamatergic receptors, including N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) and non-NMDA (e.g., a-amino-3-hydroxy-5 methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate, AMPA) subtypes, excite neurons in the NTS and throughout many other regions of the CNS that process cardiovascular refl exes. Non-NMDA glutamate receptors mediate fast synaptic transmission, whereas NMDA receptors provide slower and longer signaling. Although glutamate appears to be the most important neurotransmitter for refl ex transmission and processing in the NTS, other neurotransmitters, neuropeptides, and neuromodulators, including catecholamines, acetylcholine, g-aminobutyric acid (GABA), substance P, angiotensin, nitric oxide (NO), and opioids, regulate activity of these interneurons.There are important interactions between the NTS and other nearby nuclei like the area postrema, which functions as a circumventricular organ, since it is devoid of tight endothelial junctions that form the blood brain barrier. Neurons in the NTS project to forebrain nuclei including the limbic system, central nucleus of the amygdala, paraventricular, and median hypothalamic preoptic nuclei. There also are reciprocal connections between the NTS and A5 cell group, caudal raphe nuclei, rVLM, PAG, paraventricular, and lateral hypothalamic regions. Reciprocal connections are a major feature of this central autonomic network, which serves as a microprocessor to integrate signals from receptive regions important in cardiovascular control that change autonomic and neuroendocrine outfl ow and modify behavior ultimately to regulate cardiovascular function Second-order neurons from the NTS project to the cVLM where they provide tonic excitation mediated by an NMDA glutamatergic mechanism. Excitation from angiotensin II and inhibition from GABA, glycine (or a glycine-like compound), and opioids also tonically regulate activity of cVLM neurons. Third-order neurons from the cVLM, through a GABAergic mechanism, infl uence the activity of sympathetic premotor neurons in the rVLM and A5 cell group The rVLM, also called the subretrofacial nucleus, located rostral to the lateral reticular nucleus, caudal to the facial nucleus, and lateral to the olivary nucleus, is an important site of integration. The medial region of this nucleus is the source of many bulbospinal sympathetic premotor cells that project to the IML located in the lateral horn of spinal gray matter. The rVLM is subdivided into a lateral subretrofacial nucleus and a medial nucleus paragigantocellularis (PGL), called pressor regions because chemical lesions elevate blood pressure. The rostral extension of the PGL is concerned with pain control rather than cardiovascular regulation. In addition to reciprocal connections between the rVLM and the medial NTS, the rVLM receives inputs from the area postrema, cVLM, and is connected reciprocally to midline (raphe) medullary nuclei, parabrachial complex, PAG, lateral hypothalamic area, zona incerta, and paraventricular hypothalamus.A number of sympathetic premotor neurons receive convergent input from somatic and visceral afferents. Although many rVLM neurons are phenotypically adrenergic (C1 group), glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter. Blockade of excitatory amino acids does not alter resting blood pressure, indicating that tonic excitatory outfl ow does not exist. Conversely, blockade of GABA, which serves as the inhibitory neurotransmitter in barosensitive premotor sympathetic neurons projecting from cVLM to rVLM, increases their discharge activity and blood pressure. Other important neurotransmitters in the rVLM include acetylcholine and angiotensin, which also may be tonically active. Opioids (enkephalins, endorphins, endomorphin, and dynorphin), serotonin, neuropeptide Y, nociceptin, substance P, somatostatin, nitric oxide, and/or thyrotropin-releasing hormone are not tonically active and may act as neuromodulators.Some vasomotor cells in the rVLM discharge with a cardiovascular rhythm, which can be measured directly or over time with pulse or spike triggered averaging, a time domain analysis relating intermittent unit activity to the cardiovascular cycle or sympathetic activity The A5 noradrenergic cell group located in the rostral-most portion of the ventrolateral medulla is distinct from the rVLM. These neurons receive input 832 The iVLM, located between the cVLM and the rVLM, is an essential component of the barorefl ex in rabbits and possibly rats. Like the cVLM, the iVLM projects to the rVLM. Most neurons are not immunoreactive for tyrosine hydroxylase and therefore are distinguished from A1 cells located in this region The noradrenergic A1 cell group in the cVLM is an important central component of the barorefl ex. These neurons project directly to supraoptic and paraventricular hypothalamic regions and mediate vasopressin release during barorefl ex unloading. Cells in the A1 region are under tonic GABA inhibition from the NTS. The PAG, surrounding the cerebral aqueduct in the midbrain, receives inputs from NTS, hypothalamus, and PBN and projects to the medullary reticular formation. Activation of the dorsolateral PAG leads to a defense reaction, including an increase in blood pressure (Box 36.1). The ventrolateral PAG is a depressor region that receives input from the arcuate nucleus, medullary raphe nuclei, visceral and somatosensory systems. It regulates sympathetic outfl ow to muscle and kidney in a viscerotopic manner by infl uencing activity in the rVLM Several specialized groups of hypothalamic neurons are important in cardiovascular regulation. The hypothalamus is divided into the anterior, posterior, and middle regions. The anterior region, overlying the optic chiasm, includes the circadian pacemaker (suprachiasmatic nucleus) as part of the preoptic nucleus, which controls blood pressure cycles, body temperature, and a number of hormones. The middle portion of the hypothalamus, overlying the pituitary stalk, is composed of dorsomedial, ventromedial, paraventricular, supraoptic, and arcuate nuclei. The paraventricular nucleus projects to sympathetic and parasympathetic premotor neurons in the medulla and spinal cord. The arcuate nucleus synthesizes opioid peptides, which modulate neuronal function in regions like the ventrolateral PAG and rVLM. The arcuate nucleus is part of a long-loop pathway that modulates visceral afferent related increases in sympathetic outfl ow during somatic afferent stimulation (see section on refl ex interactions).The hypothalamus directly and indirectly controls endocrine function. Large (magnocellular) neurons in paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei release vasopressin or oxytocin into the circulation from the posterior pituitary. Vasopressin neurons in magnocellular and paraventricular nuclei have a phasic pacemaker pattern of discharge activity. Vasopressin is produced as a prohormone in the cell bodies. Prohormones are cleaved as they are transported down axons in vesicles to the posterior pituitary where they are released as the active hormone. As suggested by its name, vasopressin vasoconstricts many regional circulations, particularly skin and muscle. Vasopressin also is called antidiuretic hormone (ADH) since it promotes water reabsorption in renal collecting tubules and expands plasma volume; both actions augment blood pressure. Hypothalamic input from atrial, baroreceptor, chemoreceptor, and somatic (muscle) afferents leads to vasopressin release.Outputs from the CNS to effector organs involved in cardiovascular refl ex regulation pass through sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system. Cardiovascular sympathetic premotor neurons in the brain stem and the diencepha- regions in the hypothalamus, midbrain, and medulla project either directly or indirectly to presympathetic neurons in the rVLM. Distinct but overlapping pools of neurons are present in this region that provide separate sympathetic inputs to different regional vascular beds, the heart, and the adrenal medulla. C.A., catecholamine Cardiac preganglionic parasympathetic neurons originate in the nucleus ambiguus in the ventrolateral medullary reticular formation and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus in the dorsomedial region of the The central and autonomic nervous systems play crucial roles in modulating cardiovascular activity for appropriate responses to aversive stimuli. Behaviors studied include the fl ight or fi ght response, frequently called the defense reaction, and the playing dead response caudal medulla near the fourth ventricle ( Substantial information is available about the principal components of the anatomical system responsible for neural refl ex control of the cardiovascular system, particularly the better studied visceral and somatic cardiovascular refl exes. Concepts of central integration have undergone substantial refi nement over the last several decades. However, despite the substantial new knowledge that has been gained, we are just beginning to understand the interactive nature of the various central nuclei, pathways, and processes responsible for controlling the cardiovascular system in many conditions associated with afferent activation.Blood pressure is governed by circulating blood and plasma volume and the caliber of blood vessels. Neural mechanisms regulate vascular resistance/conductance through tonic sympathetic activity called sympathetic tone that actively regulates basal constriction (vascular smooth muscle tone) of resistance vessels. These small arterioles of 250-100 mm diameter are heavily innervated by a surrounding sympathetic neural meshwork. Neurally mediated changes in arteriolar lumen diameter occur in virtually all regional circulatory systems and hence are important in the regulation of arterial blood pressure. Sympathetic tone originates from higher brain centers in the medulla and medial diencephalon and exists even in the absence of input into these regions from external sensors Chemosensitivity and pacemaker activity contribute to tonic activity of premotor sympathetic neurons that generate basal sympathetic tone The cardiovascular system is controlled by networks of oscillators that help maintain blood pressure and the cardiovascular responses to a complex environment. Central generators responsible for cardiovascular and 10-Hz rhythms are distributed over a wide region in the brain stem. Additional investigation is required to understand how the rhythms are created and the mechanisms underlying the contribution of FIGURE 36.5 Horizontal view of preganglionic parasympathetic cardiac and pulmonary motoneurons in the nucleus ambiguus (nA) and dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (dvn). The fourth (IV) ventricle and the obex are shown for reference The cardiovascular system must respond quickly to cope with demands originating from changes in the internal and external environments. Rapid changes in autonomic tone occur principally by one of two mechanisms, alterations in activity originating from the brain or through a refl ex event. Alterations in autonomic activity originating as the result of voluntary or involuntary actions like exercise (Box 36.2) or the defense reaction, in part, originate from the brain and are termed feed-forward mechanisms, to be distinguished from the feedback component involving true refl exes. Feed-forward events lack an afferent limb characteristic of refl ex events, although visual, auditory, or other forms of sensory input provide the input leading to initiation of the response. Refl ex events involve afferent and efferent neural limbs and a central neural integration component.The primary function of various refl ex mechanisms concerned with cardiovascular control is to maintain homeostasis. Blood pressure, blood fl ow, and the local metabolic environment, especially blood pH and oxygen tension, are some of the most important variables controlled. Sensory endings of afferent fi bers initiating these refl exes function as mechano-or chemoreceptors. This section describes several of the more important refl ex pathways, including the sensory transduction mechanism, afferent limb, central neural integration, autonomic outfl ow, and effector organ responses.The heart and blood vessels distribute oxygen and nutrients to every cell in the body and, in turn, eliminate metabolic waste products through the lungs and kidneys. These actions are accomplished by appropriate function of the heart, which pumps blood, and optimal distribution of cardiac output to organs that need a variable supply of blood, depending on the underlying conditions. Maintenance of an adequate blood pressure as the driving force for blood fl ow allows appropriate perfusion of organs. Mechanosensitive nerve endings in baroreceptor regions are present predominately in two locations: bifurcation of common and internal carotid arteries (carotid sinus) and aortic arch. Although the vessel walls are elastic in nature, they also contain smooth muscle. Baroreceptor nerve endings branch to form loops and rings existing as either large compact endings or terminal fi brillar expansions in adventitia or at the border of adventitia and media between muscle cells, elastic, and collagen VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS FIGURE 36.7 Coronal section displaying sites in PAG (also called the central gray matter) that elicited a defense reaction after microinjection of excitatory amino acid (EAA) (top). Sagittal section of the area in the PAG that causes the hypertensive response, overlapping with the area projecting to sympathoexcitatory cells in the rVLM that, in turn, project to the IML (bottom) Stretching a vessel wall containing baroreceptor afferent endings, most commonly resulting from an increase in blood pressure, causes negative chronotropic and inotropic events, systemic arteriolar and venular vasodilation, as well as changes in the rate of secretion of vasopressin. The resulting decrease in blood pressure opposes the original change in transmural pressure and reduces baroreceptor stimulation, leading to the term closed loop negative feedback refl ex Decreased heart rate, in response to increased blood pressure, is a function of an immediate increase in vagal motor tone and a slower decrease in sympathetic activity, depending on the initial heart rate. At low basal or resting heart rates, with signifi cant parasympathetic and little sympathetic tone, decreased chronotropy chiefl y results from a further increase in vagal activity. At high heart rates, increased parasympathetic activity and withdrawal of sympathetic activity contribute to the negative chronic response.Barorefl ex sensitivity in human subjects is increased at slow heart rates and during expiration, providing a partial explanation for sinus arrhythmia Voluntary exercise leads to a number of hemodynamic changes, including increases in blood pressure, heart rate, myocardial contractility, stroke volume, cardiac output, and vasoconstriction of inactive regional circulations. Vasoconstrictor responses compete with vasodilation caused by increased metabolic activity and fl ow-mediated vasodilation in active regions of the body. These changes are the result of increased neurohumoral activity. In particular, changes in autonomic neural tone include increased sympathetic and withdrawal of parasympathetic activity to the heart and vasculature. Alterations in autonomic tone, particularly decreased activity in vagal motor nerves to the heart, begin immediately after exercise starts. Two processes drive these autonomic changes, including the feed forward activity or central command and the exercise pressor refl ex. Central command or "cortical irradiation" originates in a number of supraspinal regions in the CNS, including motor cortex, premotor cortex, and supplementary motor cortex, subthalamic (hypothalamic) locomotor region or H1 and H2 fi elds of Forel in the diencephalon, midbrain mesencephalic locomotor region, and the pontomedullary locomotor strip. The hypothalamic locomotor region likely is part of the defense area (Box 36.1). Ultimately, one or more of these sites acts through medullary centers to regulate autonomic neural tone. Stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotor region in paralyzed animals either electrically or with a GABA antagonist evokes locomotion, hemodynamic, and respiratory changes quite similar to those observed during voluntary exercise. Stimulation of the subthalamic locomotor region also inhibits the baroreceptor refl ex, consistent with observed suppression of this refl ex during high-intensity exercise. In humans, central command is responsible for early cardiorespiratory changes that occur during dynamic and static exercise. In addition to central command, stimulation of both mechano-and chemosensitive receptors in active muscle, mediated largely by group III and IV afferents, also controls cardiovascular and respiratory changes associated with static and dynamic exercise in experimental models and humans. Changes in muscle tension and/or stretch predominately activate fi nely myelinated afferents to evoke early changes in heart rate and respiration. Production of a number of chemical metabolic factors produced after a few seconds or minutes leads to slightly later activation of unmyelinated muscle afferents and helps maintain cardiorespiratory responses. The nature of metabolic products that stimulate muscle afferents during exercise likely is linked to an imbalance between oxygen supply and demand-that is, a mismatch or error signal. Potential candidates include lactic acid, changes in pH, potassium, and perhaps kinins. Prostaglandins sensitize these sensory endings to the action of other metabolic products. Other metabolites, including adenosine, vasopressin, nicotine, angiotensin, catecholamines, and angiotensin, either do not cause cardiovascular responses when injected into muscle or are associated with pain rather than nonpainful refl ex responses.VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS heart rate responses to increased carotid sinus pressure (after 200-600 ms latency), whereas alterations in both vagal and sympathetic activity cause chronotropic changes during carotid sinus hypotension. Slowing of the heart rhythm depends on the timing of carotid sinus stimulation relative to the cardiac cycle and the duration of stimulation, with maximal changes occurring 750 ms before the P wave and with stimuli lasting 1.25 s. Phasic enhancement and rapid adaptation provide a substantial advantage of the refl ex to regulate beat-to-beat changes in heart rate. Temporal summation occurs during maintained stimulation of the refl ex, providing prolonged chronotropic suppression. However, even a single brief stimulation can elicit a chronotropic response that outlasts the stimulus due to central or effector organ prolongation of the refl ex.Arterial baroreceptors, through a vagal mechanism, tonically infl uence the A-V cardiac conduction system and infl uence conduction through the His bundle during increases or decreases in pressure. This mechanism coordinates conduction between the upper and the lower cardiac chambers as heart rate varies, to optimize preload and stroke volume. Conversely, baroreceptors provide little regulation of atrial and ventricular conduction (bundle branches and Purkinje system).Baroreceptor-mediated changes in sympathetic tone lead to large changes in myocardial ventricular contractility, whereas small reciprocal changes in myocardial function occur during changes in vagal motor activity. Contrasting infl uences of sympathetic and vagal efferent activity on inotropic performance are largely a function of differences in ventricular innervation by the two systems.Studies in animals and humans have examined the infl uence of high-pressure baroreceptors on regional vascular resistance Arterial hypertension refl exly decreases heart rate and myocardial contractility, resulting in reduced cardiac output. Along with cardiac pump function changes, increased baroreceptor activity leads to withdrawal of sympathetic tone to arteries and veins, causing corresponding increases in caliber of resistance and capacitance vessels. Thus, increased arterial baroreceptor afferent activity in response to hypertension causes refl ex arterial vasodilation, which, along with the decreased cardiac output, helps return blood pressure back toward normal. Concurrent venodilation, in most animal species studied, reduces venous return and cardiac preload. In contrast to observations in animals, human studies of barorefl ex function have not documented signifi cant changes in central venous pressure nor sustained changes in cutaneous venomotor tone Signifi cant interactions exist between the right and left baroreceptor regions and between carotid and aortic regions Aortic barorefl exes are more impaired in hypertension than carotid barorefl exes. Also, the heart rate component is affected more profoundly by hypertension than the blood pressure response, indicating that barorefl ex control of parasympathetic activity is infl uenced more than sympathetic activity. Central resetting also occurs in hypertensive subjects although the underlying mechanisms are unknown.Patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) experience barorefl ex dysfunction Carotid sinus hypersensitivity results from local and systemic disease near the carotid bifurcation Arterial chemoreceptors are located principally in two regions along the great vessels: the carotid bodies at the bifurcation of the common carotid arteries and the aortic bodies in the aortic arch Sensory fi bers from the carotid body course through the carotid sinus (Hering's) nerve, a branch of the glossopharyngeal (IX cranial) nerve; cell bodies of carotid body sensory afferents are in the petrosal and, to a smaller extent, superior cervical ganglia Carotid and aortic body chemoreceptors are stimulated by decreases in the partial pressure of oxygen (Pao 2 ), with a threshold beginning at about 85 mm Hg, and increases in partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Paco 2 ) Sensitivity of aortic and carotid body chemoreceptors to arterial hypoxia. Compared to discharge activity of carotid chemoreceptors, aortic chemoreceptors manifest a smaller response of the arterial Po 2 levels Peripheral chemoreceptors respond not only to changes in Pao 2 , Paco 2, and pH, but also are strongly stimulated by chemicals like lobeline, nicotine, and cyanide Oxygen sensing of the carotid body occurs as an instantaneous acute response and as a more chronic cellular change over days to weeks Ventricular sensory receptors mostly exist as bare nerve endings situated in the interstitium. Finely myelinated (Ad) or unmyelinated cardiac afferent fi bers (C) project to the CNS through vagal or sympathetic (spinal) pathways Refl ex cardiovascular responses to stimulation of either mechano-or chemosensitive vagal endings are primarily inhibitory, resulting in reduced sympathetic nerve activity, depressor responses, and bradycardia. Conversely, activation of sympathetic cardiac ventricular afferents refl exly excites the cardiovascular system, leading to an increase in blood pressure and heart rate ( Adverse cardiovascular refl exes originating from the atria and ventricles are associated with clinical conditions like aortic stenosis, where high left ventricular pressures generated during stress stimulates vagal afferent mechanoreceptors causing vasodilation and occasionally syncope Prolonged supraventricular tachyarrhythmias like atrial fi brillation and paroxysmal supraventricular arrhythmias are associated occasionally with refl ex diuresis and orthostatic intolerance Hypertensive patients demonstrate reduced refl ex forearm vasoconstriction during LBNP ranging from −5 to −40 mm Hg, suggesting that both cardiopulmonary and arterial barorefl exes are impaired. Also, by reducing atrial compliance and diminishing responses of stretch sensitive atrial myelinated endings to elevated volume and pressure, CHF impairs the refl ex response to increased plasma volume, thus promoting higher levels of circulating ADH and volume retention. As such, reduced cardiac afferent information in response to high atrial pressures contributes to periph-FIGURE 36.14 Effects of LBNP on aortic mean pressure (MP), aortic pulse pressure (PP), right atrial pressure (RAP), HR, splanchnic blood fl ow (SBF), and forearm blood fl ow (FBF). Low-level LBNP (0-20 mm Hg) lowered venous return and RAP and, by unloading cardiopulmonary receptors, signifi cantly decreased skin and muscle FBF and slightly reduced SBF. High-level LBNP (20-50 mm Hg), which reduced aortic PP and eventually aortic MP (therefore also unloading high-pressure arterial baroreceptors), increased HR and decreased both FBF and SBF VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS FIGURE 36.15 Changes in mean arterial pressure (MAP), HR, and left ventricular dP/dt at 40 mm Hg developed pressure, as an index of myocardial contractile function, during stimulation of the epicardial surface of the heart with increasing concentrations of the reactive oxygen species, hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ). Transection of both vagi to interrupt the afferents coursing in this pathway, leaving the sympathetic afferent system intact (middle panels), resulted in a concentration-dependent refl ex pressor response in association with increases in HR and myocardial contractility. Denervation of sympathetic (spinal) afferent pathways from the heart, leaving the vagal afferent system intact (right panels), converted the response to refl ex cardiovascular inhibition, consisting of graded reductions in MAP, HR, and dP/dt. Stimulation of the ventricle when both afferent pathways were intact (left panels) led to a small pressor response with little change in HR or dP/dt as a result of occlusive interaction in the NTS The kidney is innervated by myelinated mechanosensitive and chemosensitive afferents. Myelinated afferents respond to increased ureteral pressure and distension of renal pelvis in most species, except nonhuman primates, where these receptors are sparse.These mechanoreceptors frequently respond to changes in arterial or venous pressure and frequently a number of chemical mediators, including bradykinin, prostaglandins, histamine, adenosine, acetylcholine, and nicotine. The role of these mediators in stimulating these endings during conditions such as ischemia has not been determined. Two types of renal chemoreceptors have been described, including the CR 1 receptor that responds to hypoxia, ischemia, or cyanide infusion, and the CR 2 receptor that responds to ion movement, including back infusion of urine, NaCl, and VI. REGULATORY SYSTEMS FIGURE 36.16 Responses of a sympathetic afferent fi ber to repeated myocardial ischemia before (A) and after (B) blockade of thromboxane A 2 receptors in the heart with BM13177. This C-fi ber afferent with a conduction velocity of 1.83 m/s innervating the posterior left ventricle (ଝ, inset) was excited biphasically during fi ve minutes of regional ischemia (see ligature). Blockade of thromboxane's action reduced the increase in total discharge activity by ∼50% from 214 to 103 imp/5 min, as demonstrated by actual responses in panels below histograms at indicated times.KC1, but not urea or mannitol Refl ex cardiovascular activation commonly is observed during renal afferent stimulation. However, blood pressure is not tonically regulated by renal afferent input. Renorenal refl exes occur during stimulation of renal mechano-or chemoreceptors, leading to diuresis and natriuresis in association with decreased contralateral renal nerve activity. Renal afferents likely play a role in hypertension resulting from renal artery stenosis (Goldblatt kidney model) or coarctation involving the renal circulation There are many examples of interactions between refl ex systems. For example, low frequency, low intensity somatic afferent stimulation during electroacupuncture produces long-lasting reduction in visceral afferent-induced sympathoexcitatory increases in blood pressure by as much as 40% Refl ex control of the cardiovascular system provides a unique advantage to mammalian species by allowing them to cope with the environment. The ability to respond rapidly to changes in blood pressure, regional blood fl ow, chemical composition of the blood and interstitial fl uid, and adverse events such as pain, stress, and ischemia is managed by a set of sensory afferent systems that provide input into cardiovascular centers in the hypothalamus, midbrain, and brain stem with the end result of inducing both immediate and long-term changes in the autonomic and hormonal neuroeffector systems. Over the last century, an indepth understanding of many neural mechanisms underlying these refl ex events has been achieved. It is now known, for example, that even though these systems are largely responsible for benefi cial shortterm adaptations, they can play a role in a number of diseases that contribute to substantial morbidity and mortality. Recent insights suggest that it may be possible to activate these systems to more optimally regulate disease states like hypertension. Future challenges are to further defi ne mechanisms underlying activation of sensory endings and central neural integrative functions, including interactions of multiple systems that add complexity to the behavior of interneurons in multiple regions concerned with conditioning refl ex responses. Of particular interest are the new opportunities for investigation that are now present as a result of recently developed molecular and genetic approaches.Mentis, G. Z., Siembab, V. C., Zerda, R., O'Donovan, M. J., and Alvarez, F. J. (2006 The circulatory system, which includes the heart and the vascular system, distributes oxygen and nutrients and eliminates waste products of metabolically active cells in all organs. The heart's synchronized muscular pumping action provides kinetic energy to circulate blood that is distributed in accordance with the particular needs of each organ. Organ blood fl ow is critically dependent on driving pressure (blood pressure) and regional vascular resistance. The nervous system regulates vascular resistance, cardiac output, and hence arterial blood pressure.The body must cope with diverse conditions varying from bed rest to maximal exercise, cold to hot environments, ocean depths to sea level to high altitude, including space fl ight, and fear to arousal. Clinical conditions like hypotension or hypertension, myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure, acute asthma (bronchoconstriction), and chronic renal failure represent a few of the varied conditions to which the cardiovascular system must respond to provide optimal organ function.Short-and long-term regulatory mechanisms allow the cardiovascular system to meet these challenges. Two are critically important for short-term cardiovascular adjustments. These include neural refl exes activated by sensory systems that monitor the internal and external environment and rapidly alter cardiovascular function. Second, behavioral changes adjust cardiovascular function to cope with the environment, including, among others, changes in body position, activity level, and conscious changes in environmental exposure, such as avoidance. Other behavioral changes like the defense reaction or central command are involuntary and constitute primitive survival mechanisms, allowing higher organisms to respond quickly to adverse or stressful conditions like exercise. This chapter focuses on neural regulation of the cardio vascular system, rather than on behavioral modifi cations.Neural regulation of the cardiovascular system includes two sets of interactive functional elements. One set of regulatory elements consists of regions in the central nervous system (CNS) that maintain basal or tonic output that, through the autonomic nervous system, continuously infl uences effector organ function, the heart and vascular system. The second system provides phasic regulation of cardiovascular function and consists of a large number of neural refl exes, each of which is composed of an afferent or sensory arm, regions in the CNS that integrate multiple sensory inputs, and an efferent or autonomic arm. Cardiovascular refl exes are differentiated by unique features of their sensory component and effector organ responses. Short and long-loop refl exes are initiated by stimulation of sensory nerve endings positioned in locations that provide the ability to sense the local environment. These afferent endings are depolarized by chemical, mechanical, or thermal stimuli or to a combination of events (i.e., bimodal or polymodal function). Afferent impulse activity is transmitted through fi nely myelinated or unmyelinated, group III/Ad and group IV/C somatic and visceral nerve fi bers. The sympathetic nervous system responds not globally but with individual patterns of activity depending on the refl ex (e.g., baroreceptor, chemoreceptor, and cardiopulmonary) as a result of supraspinal organization. Several CNS regions are involved in the integrative aspect of Carotid sinus and aortic arch baroreceptors respond to changes in mean pressure, pulse pressure, and the rate of rise of blood pressure ( More information is available on mechanisms of activation of myelinated compared to unmyelinated baroreceptor sensory nerve fi bers and most of the earlier comments refer to the former group. Fundamental differences between these two sets of afferents include a higher threshold, reduced responsiveness to changes in intravascular pressure, less regular discharge, and lower maximal frequency of discharge activity of C versus A fi bers. Unmyelinated baroreceptor afferents are relatively inactive under basal conditions. Conversely, the threshold for discharge of most myelinated baroreceptor afferents is near resting mean arterial pressure.Arterial baroreceptors can be reset ( Acute and chronic resetting of arterial baroreceptors in response to a sustained increase in arterial blood pressure. Note that the immediate response occurring after seconds to minutes (C in middle panel) during an increase in blood pressure partially restores the increase in discharge frequency, whereas the chronic response occurring after days to weeks (D in right panel) completely restores the activity (A in all panels) perhaps caused by changes in biophysical properties of sensory nerve membranes, such as ionic mechanisms or local release of substances from the endothelium and even resetting in the central nervous system, may underlie this phenomenon. Central resetting occurs when neural-humoral responses are altered during direct stimulation of afferent nerves. Although inhibition of central processing is observed most commonly, paradoxical central facilitation can occur and may briefl y oppose central inhibition. Other than localized vascular changes that lead to resetting of afferent endings, mechanisms underlying peripheral and central neuronal resetting remain ill defi ned.Although arterial baroreceptors primarily act as mechanoreceptors, their function can be modifi ed by changes in the regional chemical environment. For instance, circulating or locally released catecholamines constrict vascular smooth muscle and hence unload baroreceptor nerve endings Several hormonal systems, including angiotensin, arginine vasopressin, and atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), strongly infl uence the vascular system and end organ function, for example the kidney's regulation of body fl uid balance. These hormones also infl uence blood pressure by regulating sympathetic tone, in part, through their barorefl ex effects. Angiotensin and vasopressin are potent vasoconstrictors. Angiotensin also has many actions in the peripheral and central nervous systems, for example by facilitating activation of sympathetic ganglia and stimulating the adrenal medulla to release norepinephrine and epinephrine. Angiotensin decreases barorefl ex sensitivity and facilitates its ability to increase blood pressure through a central action on several circumventricular organs, including the area postrema in the hindbrain, the subfornical organ (SFO), anteroventral third ventricle (AV3V), organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, and median preoptic nucleus (MNO) in the forebrain. Through an action on V 1 receptors in the area postrema, vasopressin acts on V 1 receptors inhibit sympathetic outfl ow and facilitate baroreceptor refl ex function. Likewise, ANF reduces sympathetic activity. Although controversial, ANF may stimulate cardiopulmonary afferents to suppress barorefl ex function and promote renal sodium excretion. The AV3V region is critical for fl uid and electrolyte balance and likely participates as part of a long-loop supramedullary pathway in the barorefl ex The primary function of the arterial barorefl ex system is to oppose changes in blood pressure Abnormal baroreceptor function contributes to the pathogenesis of certain disorders like hypertension Although the best known effect of these receptors is on respiration, stimulation of peripheral chemoreceptors both directly and indirectly infl uences the cardiovascular system Peripheral chemoreceptors are responsible for hypoxic (e.g., high altitude) arterial hypertension and venoconstriction, although CNS chemoreceptors may facilitate these refl exes. The vasoconstrictor response is modifi ed to some extent by the direct effect of low Po 2 that relaxes vascular smooth muscle. Carotid and aortic chemoreceptor stimulation generally causes vasoconstriction in skeletal muscle, kidney, and intestine and cutaneous vasodilation Cardiovascular and respiratory responses induced by systemic hypoxia. The responses are a composite of the infl uence of low arterial Po 2 on peripheral chemoreceptors and their infl uence on both respiratory and cardiovascular centers in the brain stem (solid arrows), as well as direct effects of low Po 2 on the CNS and effector organs, including the heart and blood vessels (dotted arrows) Intravenous veratridine reduces heart rate and blood pressure through stimulation of cardiac vagal afferent endings, a response known as the von BezoldJarisch refl ex. The heart is innervated by atrial and ventricular vagal and sympathetic afferent endings that respond to mechanical, chemical, or both types of stimuli. The term cardiopulmonary baroreceptors is used frequently to describe refl ex vagal events that arise from the four cardiac chambers, great veins, and other vessels in the lungs. Cardiac vagal afferents fi rst synapse in the medial subnucleus of the NTS. Like arterial baroreceptors, second-order cardiac refl ex pathways project from the NTS to the cVLM (via glutaminergic synapses), which in turn sends GABAergic projections to sympathetic premotor neurons in the rVLM. Sympathetic afferents project to many regions in the hypothalamus, pons, midbrain, and brain stem, including the rVLM where they infl uence sympathetic outfl ow.Receptive fi elds of myelinated afferents are located in venoatrial junctions; afferent connections to the CNS principally course through the vagus In 1915, Bainbridge described a refl ex increase in the heart rate in dogs in response to infusion of saline, most evident at low basal heart rates. Interestingly, despite the chronotropic response that originates from activation of myelinated afferents, arterial pressure, systemic vascular resistance, and myocardial contractility do not change consistently during stimulation of venoatrial junctions by distending small intravascular balloons. Several studies have failed to document the Bainbridge refl ex in humans. Unmyelinated atrial vagal and sympathetic afferents also innervate atria, but their physiological function is uncertain.Mild lower-body negative pressure (LBNP), which primarily unloads cardiopulmonary receptors to reduce blood fl ow to both skin and muscle, has only a small effect on splanchnic resistance vessels and very little infl uence on capacitance vessels Cardiopulmonary receptor activation is more effective in decreasing renin and plasma vasopressin than arterial baroreceptors eral edema and ascites Studies of visceral refl exes have yielded substantial information on the mechanisms by which visceral spinal sensory nerve endings are activated as well as their central integrative mechanisms.Mesenteric ischemia refl exly increases blood pressure through temporal and spatial summation of input to cardiovascular centers in the brain stem. The pattern of response includes increases in heart rate, myocardial contractility, maintenance of cardiac output in the face of increased afterload, and vasoconstriction of splanchnic, hindlimb, and the coronary arterial circulation. Chemical mediators formed during mesenteric ischemia, including bradykinin, prostaglandin E 2 , hydroxyl radicals, lactic acid, 8R,15S-dihydroxyeicosan tetraenoic acid (diHETE), serotonin, and histamine, stimulate or sensitize predominantly unmyelinated afferent endings. Low Po 2 triggers sensory nerve discharge through the production of other chemical mediators. Conversely, leukotriene B 4 modulates the afferent response during regional ischemia, for example, in patients with splanchnic vascular atherosclerosis. Hypercapnia, prostacyclin, thromboxane A 2 , lactate, and mechanical stimulation are not involved in the ischemic refl ex. The physiological importance of