according to a given criterion for example, sort by shape. At this point the patients perform the task as well as control subjects. However, when the criterion is changed, for example to sort by number, the patients are impaired they are unable to inhibit sorting by the previous rule. This behavior, that is continuing to perform a previously reinforced behavior even though it is no longer rewarded, is called perseveration and is characteristic of a prefrontal patients performance on a wide variety of tasks.This inability to ignore irrelevant stimuli and the actions they trigger has led PFC patients to be described as stimulus-bound, and the disruption of the patients ability to think and plan has been termed goal neglect Prefrontal patients have a great deal of diffi culty planning and organizing their lives. Wilder Penfi eld, a neurosurgeon during the mid-twentieth century, described the case of his sister, on whom he operated to remove a large frontal tumor. Prior to the surgery she had been an excellent cook, and though her basic culinary skills remained subsequent to the operation, she seemed unable to organize her behavior so that all the elements of the meal were ready simultaneously. Instead she would move haphazardly from preparing one part of the meal to another, so that some parts of the meal would be burnt while others had hardly been started.Formal tests have been developed to measure the ability of patients to organize their behavior. For example, the Tower of London Test requires the patient to think several moves in advance Impairments in planning might be related partly to diffi culties evaluating the consequences of actions. Faced with a number of different, competing actions, patients might not choose wisely because they are less sure of the consequences of those actions. Evidence for this arises from a "gambling" task Patients also might have diffi culties planning due to a problem with holding information in mind for a short while. This is the kind of short-term memory that one relies on when reading a phone number and then dialing that number. This function is called working memory because the information is forgotten as soon as it is no longer relevant. The concept of working memory is infl uenced by the observation that monkeys with lesions of the PFC have defi cits on a spatial delayed-response task that requires them to remember the location of a stimulus or behavioral response over a brief delay of several seconds. Early studies failed to fi nd this defi cit in humans with prefrontal damage, possibly because the patients verbalized the location of the stimulus, which presumably makes the task much easier. Later studies, however, in which the prefrontal damage was more extensive and bilateral, did show a spatial delayed response defi cit. Other studies used abstract patterns that could not be easily verbally encoded, and found that the patients nonspatial working memory was also impaired.We have seen that the PFC poses a complex problem. Damage to a relatively circumscribed region of cortex in humans produces a bewildering array of symptoms. But one caution in interpreting clinical studies concerns the size of the damage that typifi es the prefrontal patient. Not only does the damage often encompass many different PFC regions, each of which may have different functions, but it also often encroaches onto neighboring regions, such as the premotor cortex, the cingulate cortex, and the insular cortex. Plus, it should be remembered that the PFC comprises many different anatomically defi ned areas, each possessing unique patterns of connections with the rest of the brain it might be that each component of the dysexecutive syndrome arises from damage to different areas of the PFC. These matters are diffi cult to explore in humans with PFC damage, because the damage is typically so extensive that it encompasses many brain regions both within and external to the PFC. There are two solutions to this problem. The fi rst is to use neuroimaging techniques, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging, in healthy humans. This technique can detect areas of increased neuronal activity in specifi c brain regions with a resolution of 2-4 mm 3 . A second method is to study the effects of experimentally produced focal lesions in monkeys. We will discuss each of these approaches in turn.Neuroimaging studies have shown that many of the tasks with which patients with PFC damage struggle also activate PFC in healthy subjects. However, an advantage of the technique is that specifi c regions within PFC can be identifi ed that are activated preferentially by specifi c cognitive processes. For example, fMRI studies show that performing the WCST activates ventrolateral PFC. In general, a number of trends have emerged from this fi eld regarding the functional organization of PFC.The clearest functional distinction is between orbitofrontal cortex and lateral PFC. Orbitofrontal cortex consistently is activated by tasks requiring the processing of rewarding or emotional information. For example, it shows more activation to pleasant images or unpleasant images as opposed neutral images. Similar results are seen in other modalities such as pleasant or unpleasant smells, tastes, sounds, and touches. Orbitofrontal cortex even responds to abstract rewards such as winning or losing money. Orbitofrontal cortex is not simply responding to the presence of these rewards, but seems to use this information to guide our decisions and choices. For example, orbitofrontal cortex is activated when subjects are choosing a meal from a menu, but not if they are simply reading the menu with no intention of ordering.In contrast, lateral PFC is activated by a wide assortment of cognitive tasks. These include tests of inhibitory control, rule switching tasks, and working memory tasks. A distinction that has emerged from these studies concerns the respective roles of dorsolateral and ventrolateral PFC regions. Ventrolateral PFC is activated predominately by tasks that require holding information in working memory whereas dorsolateral PFC is activated when that information must be manipulated in some way. We return to this idea later in the chapter when we discuss the "multiple processing levels" theory of prefrontal function. Recently investigators have begun to focus on the most anterior portions of PFC, referred to as the frontal pole, which corresponds to area 10. There is some evidence that this region might be responsible for controlling the transfer of information between dorsolateral and ventrolateral PFC.In sum, neuroimaging studies have helped to show that we cannot consider the PFC as a single unitary area, but that distinct subregions of PFC are responsible for carrying out specifi c processes. The clearest distinction is between the emotional and reward-based processing occurring in orbitofrontal cortex, and the more cognitive processes occurring in lateral PFC. A problem with fMRI, however, is that although it can identify which regions are more active during a given task, it does not tell us whether those regions are necessary for the performance of the task. To determine whether a given PFC subregion is necessary for a specifi c cognitive process, fi ndings from monkey 52. THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND EXECUTIVE BRAIN FUNCTIONS VII. BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE neuropsychology are useful. We discuss these fi ndings in the next section.Studying the effects of experimentally induced lesions in monkeys has two advantages. First, because the lesions are experimentally induced they can be small and focused on specifi c subregions of PFC. Second, they are a strong test of whether a specifi c subregion is necessary for the performance of a given cognitive task. However, we must also bear in mind a number of points when evaluating primate neuropsychological fi ndings.First, in order to conclude that two different prefrontal areas are performing, or at least emphasize two different functions, it is necessary to demonstrate a double dissociation. A monkey with lesion X must be impaired at process A, but not process B, and a monkey with lesion Y must be impaired at process B, but not process A. A single dissociation, for example showing that lesion X impairs process A, but not process B, is insuffi cient evidence because this pattern of results could be achieved simply because the test used to assess A is more sensitive than the test used to assess process B. In many studies, monkeys were tested on just one task and any evidence for a double dissociation can only be inferred across different studies and different laboratories. This complicates the interpretation because any differences in training and testing procedures and in the extent of the lesions are potential confounding factors.Second, early studies produced large lesions. These lesions often produced damage to the underlying white matter, potentially disconnecting regions of cortex outside of the site of the lesion and often damaging underlying structures such as the basal ganglia. In recent years, excitotoxins have been developed. These drugs can be injected into an area and overexcite the cells located there. The cells subsequently die, but the underlying white matter is left intact.Third, studies in monkeys are useful only if we can show that the results are applicable to understanding the organization of human PFC. The close anatomical correspondence between monkey and human PFC suggested that there might also be close functional correspondence. However, there was a lack of direct evidence that this was indeed the case. Recently, a number of studies have used identical behavioral paradigms in monkeys and humans, and found that the paradigms tax similar PFC regions. For example, a recent fMRI study showed that both monkeys and humans activate ventrolateral PFC when they are performing the WCST. Such fi ndings help validate the monkey as a model for understanding the organization of human PFC.In 1935, Jacobsen published a seminal paper showing that lesions of the frontal lobe in monkeys produced defi cits on a spatial delayed response task. In this task, the monkey sees a reward hidden at one of two locations, and then after a brief delay is allowed to retrieve it The picture, however, is not so simple and straightforward a clear double dissociation between these impairments has not been demonstrated. Consider the hypothesized spatial versus object dissociation in the PFC. Dorsolateral PFC can impair performance on tasks that do not have a spatial component, such as object self-ordered search tasks. In this task the monkey is presented with three objects covering rewards. They must move each object in turn to get the reward, but after each choice a screen is lowered and the objects positions are shuffl ed Likewise, the notion that orbital PFC is responsible for inhibitory control is not so straightforward. It has subsequently been shown that inhibitory control is not unique to the orbital PFC. If the appropriate test is used, inhibitory control defi cits can also be observed in monkeys with lesions of dorsolateral PFC. Marmosets were trained on a task similar to the WCST. They had to choose complex stimuli on the basis of a rule, such as "choose by shape." When they were required to switch between different rules, monkeys with lesions of the dorsolateral PFC perseverated by continuing to choose on the basis of the previous rule, whereas monkeys with lesions of the orbital PFC were unimpaired. In contrast, when the same stimuli were used in an object reversal task, monkeys with lesions of the orbital PFC perseverated by continuing to choose the stimulus that initially had been rewarded, but the performance of monkeys with lesions of the dorsolateral PFC was normal. This suggests that both the dorsolateral and orbital PFC contribute to inhibitory control, but the dorsolateral PFC may be more engaged by inhibitory control over rules, whereas the orbital PFC may be more engaged by inhibitory control over choices based on objects and rewards. For more discussion of the issue of PFC functional topography, see Box 52.1.Conditional learning tasks often are used to test the ability to gain volitional control over behavior. Conditional learning refers to a class of tasks in which associative relationships must be learned that are arbitrary and extend beyond the simple one-to-one mappings that underlie refl exive reactions. Whether or not a given response is successful depends on additional, contextual, information. For example, reaching for popcorn can be rewarding, but only if one takes other information into account if the popcorn belongs to another patron, the result could be disastrous. The need to take into account complex relationships in order to decide among alternative actions is presumably why cognitive control has evolved.Monkeys with PFC damage are impaired at such tasks. For example, when monkeys are trained to learn associations between three visual cues and three directional movements of a joystick, simply moving the joystick is not enough to produce reward. Rather, the specifi c movement direction is dependent on the specifi c cue. One means "up," the other "down," and so on. Bilateral damage to the ventrolateral and orbital PFC severely impairs this learning. Depriving the PFC of its inputs from high-order sensory cortex also results Information about topography of neural properties in the PFC can provide important insights into its function. For example, knowing that primary visual cortex is organized into groups of neurons with similar tuning for orientation provides important clues to how it analyzes visual inputs. The anatomically complex nature of the PFC, coupled with the unique patterns of connections that each prefrontal area possesses, would certainly suggest a degree of functional fractionation. But one immediate problem that investigators face when trying to address this issue is that it is not clear how to subdivide cognitive processing. It is far easier to specify the sensory attributes of an apple, than it is to list the different processes involved in planning or reasoning.One possibility is that PFC is organized by function, with different regions carrying out qualitatively different operations. One longstanding view is that the orbitofrontal area is associated with behavioral inhibition whereas ventrolateral and dorsolateral regions are associated with memory or attentional functions There is undoubtedly some spatial organization of processing within the PFC, but no clear global scheme has emerged. There is no overwhelming evidence for any one hypothesis and for some there are countervailing data. Perhaps this is not surprising. We do not yet understand the functional topography of the higher-order sensory and motor cortical areas that are interconnected with the PFC. We can, however, make some general predictions. First, PFC functional topography is likely to be based on broad categories or gradients of organization with overlap and intermixing of diverse information. Complex behavior requires that we recognize and respond to relationships across diverse dimensions, and representing these relationships is a prerequisite for cognitive control. Indeed, the majority of outputs of a given prefrontal area are to other prefrontal areas, so it is not surprising that many prefrontal neurons are multimodal. Second, because learning is central to cognitive control and modulates the properties of many PFC neurons, it should have a large infl uence on PFC topography. Indeed, the fl exible nature of controlled behaviors likely requires a dynamic anatomy, with neuronal properties changing to refl ect the demands of the current task.in conditional learning impairments. Humans with PFC damage are impaired on conditional learning tasks analogous to those conducted in monkeys. Conditional learning impairments seem to be dependent on which PFC region is damaged some studies report no conditional learning defi cit following dorsolateral PFC damage in monkeys.Like humans, monkeys with large PFC lesions display marked changes in social and emotional behavior. Monkey society is dictated by a dominance hierarchy and each monkey knows its place a monkey is submissive to monkeys higher in the hierarchy and is aggressive and threatening to monkeys lower in the hierarchy. Monkeys with large PFC lesions, however, disregard this hierarchy, and also decrease their interactions with troop members. This typically results in their being ostracized from the troop.Monkeys with lesions of the ventromedial PFC show impairments in visual recognition. This ability is tested using a delayed nonmatching-to-sample task. The monkey is presented with an object, and then after a brief delay of a few seconds, they are presented with that same object along with a novel object. New objects are used on each trial so the monkey can solve the task by recognizing which of the two objects it has previously seen in order to pick the novel object. However, patients with damage to the ventromedial PFC do not show these recognition defi cits. One possibility for this discrepancy is that the defi cit does not lie in recognition per se, but rather in the ability to learn the rules of the task. In particular, it has been suggested that the diffi culty lies in making the association between the abstract quality of novelty and receiving a reward. This aspect of the task is not required in human patients, because the patients are explicitly told the rules of the task monkeys have to learn them by trial and error.Humans with damage to the PFC present a wide variety of symptoms including a lack of inhibitory control, a shallowness of emotion, diffi culty planning and organizing behavior, and impaired working memory. In general, they seem to have diffi culty in exerting volitional control and organizing their mental processes and actions in order to direct them toward unseen goals. As a result, their behaviors are simple, reactive, and emitted without concern for future consequences.Just like humans, monkeys with extensive prefrontal damage can appear remarkably unimpaired to the casual observer. They have no motoric impairments, and their ability to discriminate a variety of sensory stimuli remains intact. They are also capable of simple learning, such as Pavlovian and instrumental conditioning. However, they are impaired when behavioral demands extend beyond this to include additional task-specifi c constraints andor involve overcoming a previously established response. Localizing a specifi c defi cit to any one PFC subregion has proven diffi cult double dissociations between different PFC regions are rare.The pattern of defi cits observed after PFC damage in humans and monkeys makes sense in light of the cognitive architecture depicted in PFC anatomy suggests it has the means for executive functions, and the effects on behavior after damage to the PFC support this idea. So do neurophysiological studies they have shown that PFC neurons have the properties one would expect from a region intimately involved in goal-directed behavior.PFC anatomy indicates that it is interconnected with many different brain systems, a prerequisite for NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX cognitive control. This high degree of connectivity is refl ected in the neural activity observed in the PFC. Its neurons are activated by visual, auditory, tactile, and gustatory stimulation as well as voluntary limb and eye movements. Further, these neurons seem capable of synthesizing this information in accord with task demands. For example, after monkeys are trained to make arm movements to visual and auditory targets appearing in different locations, many lateral PFC neurons are activated by both kinds of targets. Interestingly, few bimodal neurons were found in studies in which monkeys passively experienced visual and auditory stimuli. This fi nding suggests that task demands can exert a strong modulatory infl uence on PFC activity, which is consistent with its putative role in cognitive control.The fi rst observations of PFC neural activity that were related to a cognitive process were made in the 1970s by Fuster, Niki, and their colleagues PFC delay activity has been shown to convey a wide range of behaviorally relevant cues: objects, colors, sounds, the frequency of a vibration to the hand, and forthcoming eye and arm movements. Similar activity is also evident in the sensory cortical areas and motor areas primarily responsible for analyzing inputs and generating behaviors, especially the higher-order areas that are one or more steps removed from primary sensory and motor cortex. This is not surprising sustained activity is apparent in many brain structures and must play a role in many neural processes. For example, it is likely to underlie iconic memory, the very brief lingering "after image" of recent sensory events. However, what separates more "cognitive" working memory processes from such lower-level processes as iconic memory, is their ability to robustly sustain memories over potential distractions. PFC neurons do have this ability. For example, when monkeys are required to sustain the memory of a sample object across a delay period fi lled with visual distractors that require attention and processing, sustained activity within the prefrontal cortex can still maintain a memory of the sample object. By contrast, sustained activity in visual cortical areas seems more labile it is disrupted by the presence of distractors. Following a distracting stimulus, neural activity refl ects the distractor rather than the stimulus the monkey is retaining in working memory. This particular ability is not unique to the PFC. Some neurons in the entorhinal cortex, a region critical for memory, can also maintain sample-specifi c delay activity across intervening stimuli.How does the PFC "latch" onto goal-relevant information and maintain it without disruption Several models have been suggested. These typically employ a form of gating signal that instructs the PFC network when to maintain a given activity state. This gating 10 sec DELAY CUE FIGURE 52.6 PFC delay activity. This fi gure shows the activity of a single PFC neuron during fi ve trials of a spatial delayed response task.The arrow indicates the monkeys behavioral response at the end of the memory delay. Each small vertical line indicates an action potential from the neuron. Note the increased activity in the delay relative to other epochs. From Playing the game requires knowing the rules. To explore how these rules might be represented in the PFC, experimenters manipulate task demands: monkeys are trained on tasks in which the physical cues are held constant while their behavioral meaning changes.These studies suggest that PFC neurons represent task contingencies, the associative relationships that describe the logic needed to perform a task. Further   Note that in each case, the neurons activity depends on both the cue object and the saccade direction and that the tuning is nonlinear or conjunctive. That is, the level of activity to a given combination of object and saccade cannot be predicted from the neurons response to the other combinations. Do you pay attention to captivating yet irrelevant stimuli Do you have trouble acting appropriately, fi dgeting while listening to a lecture Do you have diffi culty planning and pursuing long-term goals Do distractions knock you "off task" When these not uncommon difficulties occur to a severe degree, they are symptoms of Attention Defi cit Hyperactivity Disorder, a disorder seen in children and adults. It is estimated that 3 to 5% of children have this disorder, with about half retaining problems into adulthood. The symptoms of ADHD involve dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex and its cortical and subcortical connections.The criteria for diagnosis of ADHD include symptoms of "inattention" and "hyperactivityimpulsivity." Patients can have either the combined type, or predominantly inattentive or predominantly hyperactiveimpulsive types. Many of the symptoms for inattention used to diagnose ADHD relate to attentional abilities of the PFC: for example, diffi culty sustaining attention or organizing, easily distracted and forgetful. Similarly, many of the symptoms of hyperactivityimpulsivity describe PFC defi cits: for example, diffi culty awaiting turn. The PFC controls attention via its projections to the parietal and temporal cortices, while it controls motor responses via its projections to the motor cortices and striatum. These circuits appear to be impaired in patients with ADHD. ADHD symptoms are especially evident in "boring" settings that require endogenous rather than exogenous regulation of behavior. For example, ADHD children can sit still and play video games for hours, but have trouble attending in school. ADHD patients have diffi culty sustaining a behavior or thought over a delay. As described in this chapter, PFC cells exhibit sustained fi ring over a delay that regulates thought and behavioral output.Structural and functional imaging studies show consistent alterations in PFC-striatal-cerebellar circuits in ADHD patients. Volumetric measures have detected smaller right-sided PFC regions. Changes in the size of the striatum also have been reported, and functional imaging studies have shown abnormal activity of both the PFC and striatum in ADHD patients performing tasks that require PFC inhibitory or attentional functions. Structural imaging studies also have shown consistent decreases in the size of the cerebellar vermis, a region that may exert regulatory infl uences on the noradrenergic cells of the locus coeruleus and the dopaminergic cells of the ventral tegmental area. These NE and DA cells in turn have profound infl uences on PFC-striatal circuitry. Thus, a smaller vermis in ADHD patients may lead to impaired catecholamine inputs to PFC and striatum. Some evidence supports this idea: a neuroreceptor imaging study suggests there are reduced numbers of catecholamine terminals in the PFC of adults with ADHD.NE and DA have a critical infl uence on PFC-striatal circuits, and thus changes in these inputs can have tremendous import on PFC cognitive functions. The current chapter describes how DA has an important effect on PFC function, and the same is true for NE. NE cells fi re when a stimulus is of interest to the animal, releasing NE in the PFC. NE stimulates post-synaptic a 2A -adrenoceptors, enhancing delay-related fi ring and strengthening regulation of behavior and attention. This is accomplished by a 2A -adrenoceptor inhibition of cAMP production, resulting in the closure of HCN channels. HCN channels are colocalized with a 2A -adrenoceptors on the dendritic spines of PFC neurons in the superfi cial layers of PFC, especially on spine necks. Thus, a 2A -adrenoceptors are ideally localized to control the neurochemical microenvironment around these channels. When cAMP builds up, HCN channels open, and synaptic inputs onto the spines are effectively shunted, thus functionally disconnecting PFC neuronal networks. In contrast, when a 2A -adrenoceptor stimulation inhibits the production of cAMP, HCN channels are closed and the networks are able to connect to control attention and behavior. In contrast, very high levels of NE and DA, such as released during stressful conditions, can impair PFC function via excessive cAMP production, and from activation of high levels of protein kinase C signaling initiated by NE  1 -adrenoceptor stimulation. Thus, the PFC has to have just the right neurochemical conditions to function optimally.What causes ADHD ADHD is highly heritable, and has been linked with genetic alterations that interfere with NE or DA signaling. These linkages include the DA transporter the D1, D5, and D4 receptors the synthetic enzyme for NE and the a 2A -adrenoceptor. Environmental factors may also lead to disruption of PFC-striatal circuits. For example, some kinds of infection BOX 52.2NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX may lead to autoantibodies that attack PFC-striatal circuits, and perinatal injury may impact these circuits.Medications for ADHD likely reduce symptoms of inattention and impulsivity by optimizing the neurochemical environment in the PFC and in the striatum. All effective treatments for ADHD interact with catecholamines: Stimulants such as Ritalin and Adderall increase NE and DA release andor block catecholamine reuptake. Recent research in rats suggests that low, therapeutic doses of these compounds preferentially increase release in PFC, and have a greater effect on the release of NE than DA. Consistent with these data, NE reuptake blockers are also used to treat ADHD, including highly selective NE agents. Drugs that mimic NE at a 2A -adrenoceptors are effective, especially in decreasing impulsivity and distractibility. Wellbutrin is a DA reuptake blocker that is used to treat ADHD. catecholamines are normal in ADHD patients, and amplifi cation of catecholamine mechanisms enhances PFC function and reduces symptoms. Support for this latter idea arises from the fact that normal individuals are improved by small doses of these medications as well, as when college students sometimes take low doses of stimulants to focus on writing a paper.All of us experience PFC dysfunction as part of daily life, especially when we are tired or stressed. These effects are likely due to neurochemical changes-for example, in NE and DA-that have great impact on the functional integrity of the PFC. But for people with ADHD, dysfunction of the PFC is much more constant and often beyond their control. Perhaps it is this prevalence of PFC dysfunction in otherwise healthy individuals, and its association with stress, that lead to the dismissal of ADHD by some as not a real disorder. It is hoped that as we come to better understand the neurobiological bases of ADHD, we will gain a fuller perspective of ADHD and its symptoms. neuron might respond to a given visual cue when the monkey is using an associative rule but exhibit weak or no activity under identical sensory and attentional conditions that differed only in that the monkey was using a spatial rule instead. Such effects have been found in PFC for associative versus spatial rules, for object matching versus spatial matching versus associative rules, and for shape matching versus object matching rules Primate behavior is not limited to following literal associations and specifi c rules. Primates can also abstract general rules or principles, not tied to any particular stimulus or response. This ability allows behavior to extend beyond specifi c circumstances that have been experienced directly. For example, humans learn the "rules" for restaurant dining from specifi c experiences and can then generalize and apply them to new restaurants. Wallis and colleagues Another hallmark of primates is the ability to quickly learn new behaviors. PFC neurons are capable of a correspondingly rapid modifi cation of their properties to meet task demands. Monkeys can learn new conditional visuomotor associations in just a few trials and as they do, PFC neural activity rapidly modifi es to refl ect the new contingencies. Striking examples of rapid experience-dependent neural plasticity come from studies of the frontal eye fi elds, part of Brodmanns area 8 that is important for voluntary shifts of gaze Feedback about the consequences of actions is key to acquiring new goal-directed behaviors. Consequently, a large proportion of PFC neurons encode information about rewards. For example, some neurons are activated by the delivery of a reward, whereas others respond when an expected reward is not delivered. PFC neurons also encode the type of reward that the monkey expects to receive, for example a piece of cabbage versus a raisin, as well as the quantity of reward the monkey expects. Further, the neurons appear to encode the monkeys relative preference for the rewards that are available, rather than some absolute measure of reward. Thus, a neuron might prefer reward A when the monkeys choice of reward is between A and B, but reward B when the choice is between B and C. The orbital PFC is the area of the PFC that receives gustatory and olfactory information, and indeed neurons responsive to rewards are found there. But many neurons responsive to reward are also found in the dorsolateral PFC.As might be expected from a brain region suspected to orchestrate complex behavior, neural activity in the PFC conveys information about a wide range of external and internal information. But its activity is not limited to simple responses to sensory events or actions. Rather, the behavioral context has a pervasive infl uence on PFC activity. After training, many of dorsolateral, ventrolateral, and orbital PFC neurons encode information about the formal demands of behavior: contingencies between a wide range of stimuli, actions, and reward consequences, and behavior-guiding rules. By robustly sustaining their activity, PFC neurons can keep this and other behaviorally relevant information online to guide behaviors that extend over time. Also consistent with its role in guiding goal-directed behavior, PFC neurons process information about the expected results of achieving goals: rewards.One proposal is that the cardinal function of the PFC is to hold recent sensory inputs and movementrelated information in active short-term memory, or working memory Working memory maintenance functions are central to cognition complex, goal-directed behaviors typically are drawn out and thus are impossible without mechanisms that extend information over time. There is ample evidence that these mechanisms are abundant in the PFC. Working memory is unlikely to be the whole story, however. Many of the tasks on which prefrontal patients and monkeys show impairment do not have an obvious working memory component, such as the WCST and reversal tasks.Recent studies have explicitly investigated this issue, by examining the performance of monkeys with lesions of the ventrolateral PFC on a simultaneous color-matching task. In this task the monkey is presented with a sample color and two test colors simultaneously. The monkey must choose the test color that matches the sample color. PFC lesioned monkeys were impaired at this task, despite the fact the task involvedcontains no delays and therefore no working memory requirements. The task does, however, require conditional rules, and the role of the PFC in the representation of such rules might explain this impairment.It has been suggested that the orbitofrontal PFC is responsible for labeling people, objects or situations with an "affective signifi cance" A defi cient somatic marker system would explain the impairments that patients with damage to the orbitofrontal PFC exhibit on the gambling task This hypothesis is similar to one advanced by William James in the nineteenth century. He proposed that emotional feelings depend upon feedback from the autonomic nervous system. For instance, running from a bear because we are afraid evokes a particular autonomic state that makes us feel afraid. Thus, as James stated, we do not run because we are afraid, but we are afraid because we run. A problem with simply using autonomic nervous system signals, however, is that autonomic states produced by different emotions can be identical. Later studies showed that manipulations of the autonomic nervous system, for example, by administering adrenaline, could alter the magnitude but not necessarily the type of emotion experienced in human subjects. These problems are avoided if the orbitofrontal cortex does not need to access the autonomic nervous system directly, but rather can use a conditioned association between the autonomic state and various cortical representations. For example, associations with the somatosensory cortex may be involved in emotional interpretations patients with damage to the somatosensory cortex have diffi culty recognizing facial emotions as do patients with orbital frontal damage.It has been proposed that the PFC is organized by level of processing, much as there are primary and higher-order sensory cortices This hypothesis has been supported by evidence from neuroimaging in humans. Subjects were required to perform fi ve spatial working memory tasks while they were scanned using positron emission tomography. This technique enables the visualization of areas of the brain with the increased blood fl ow that is related to neural activity. Two of the tasks had simple maintenance requirements they activated the ventrolateral PFC. The three other tasks also had manipulation requirements and they activated the dorsolateral PFC.Several investigators have pointed out that because knowledge about goals, means, and consequences is vital to planning and implementing complex goaldirected behavior, the PFC is likely to play a central role in its acquisition and representation. The neural instantiation of task demands in the PFC was fi rst proposed by Joaquin Fuster Other investigators have reached similar conclusions. Cognitive control also has been studied by developing simulated neural network models that can perform tasks that depend on controlled processing, such as the Stroop Test. These models invariably include units dedicated to representing task rules and contingencies. Analogies often are drawn between these units and the PFC.How might the PFC acquire rule information and use it for cognitive control Evidence for this proposal comes from the fi nding that PFC neurons show neural activity that refl ects behaviorally relevant associations between disparate and arbitrary events and actions, behavioral context and rules. Behavioral and neurophysiological studies of focal attention also point to the operation of topdown signals on the visual cortex that enhance representations of behaviorally relevant stimuli and visual fi eld locations at the expense of irrelevant ones. Evidence that such signals come from the PFC was supported by a recent observation that disconnecting the PFC from the temporal cortex prevented the activation of stored memories in the latter and caused monkeys to fail at a recall test Sustained activation is central in many views of PFC functions. This is not surprising considering the importance of working memory for cognitive control and that sustained activity is common in the PFC. But as OReilly and Munakata It is universally assumed that long-term storage in the brain depends on changing synaptic weights, by strengthening some neural connections and weakening others. Encoding information in structural changes has obvious advantages for long-term storage, but the resulting memories are relatively infl exible. Also, changing synaptic weights has local effects only the two neurons sharing the synapse are affected. The information contained in a set of synaptic weights is thus expressed only when the circuit is fi red. By contrast, the information needed to guide goal-directed behavior must be expressed in a format that allows it to affect the ongoing processing in other brain systems. Sustained activity is such a format. It is extended over time and information contained in a pattern of activity can be propagated across the brain. Thus, the ability of sustained activity to tonically infl uence other brain systems is likely important for coordinating diverse processing around a specifi c goal. It also affords fl exibility if cognitive control stems from a pattern of information maintained in the PFC, changing behavior is as easy as changing the pattern Finally, the neuronal mechanisms by which information needed for cognitive control is expressed might THEORIES OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX FUNCTION explain the severely limited capacity of controlled processes. A vast amount of information can be stored by changing synaptic weights of a network that contains many neurons, each with many potential connections. At any given time, however, most of this information is latent it is expressed only when the relevant circuit is activated. By contrast, if the information for cognitive control is expressed in a unique pattern of ongoing activity distributed across many simultaneously active neurons-a population code-then there will be a natural capacity limitation. Trying to represent more than just a few items at the same time would degrade information because the unique patterns impinging on a given set of neurons would overwrite and interfere with one another.The PFC versus the Basal Ganglia: Model-Building versus "Snapshots"The prefrontal cortex forms anatomical loops with the basal ganglia, a set of subcortical structures that have motor and learning functions. Different regions of the frontal lobe have anatomically segregated loops with the BG that are "closed," meaning that the same region of the frontal cortex that gives rise to the loop is also the target of that loop via BGs connections with the thalamus. Closed loops are noteworthy because they may allow recursive processing in which the results of processing are fed back into the loop for further elaboration. It is possible, if not likely, that some form of recursive processing is responsible for the open-ended nature of advanced thought. The ability to take charge of ones actions and direct them toward future aims is called cognitive control. Virtually all theories of cognition posit that cognition depends on functions specialized for the acquisition of information about goals and means. These functions exert a top-down infl uence on the lower-level automatic processes that mediate sensory analysis, memory storage, and motor outputs, orchestrating and directing them toward a given goal.The PFC, a brain structure that reaches its greatest complexity in the primate brain, seems to play a central role in cognitive control. It has the requisite anatomical infrastructure. It has access to, and the means to infl uence processing in, all major forebrain systems and can provide a means to synthesize the diverse information related to a given goal. Indeed, its damage in humans and monkeys results in a dysexecutive syndrome individuals are stimulus-bound and seem capable only of reacting to the immediate environment. Information about unseen goals and potential consequences of actions has little infl uence on behavior. PFC neurons also have properties consistent with their participation in cognitive control: they are multimodal, refl ect task demands, and can sustain their activity to keep task-relevant information online during task performance.Theories of PFC function suggest that it makes several contributions important for cognitive control: maintenance and manipulation of information in working memory, the assignment and recall of the affective tags related to different choices, and the acquisition and representation of behavior-guiding rules that help orchestrate goal-directed behaviors. None of these theories is mutually exclusive, and indeed, different theories may be focusing on different aspects of a complex system that is involved in a wide range of brain processes.Arnsten, A. Consciousness is one of the most enigmatic features of the universe. People not only act but feel: they see, hear, smell, recall, plan for the future. These activities are associated with subjective, ineffable, immaterial feelings that are tied in some manner to the material brain. The exact nature of this relationship-the classical mind-body problem-remains elusive and the subject of heated debate. These fi rst-hand, subjective experiences pose a daunting challenge to the scientifi c method that, in many other areas, has proven so immensely fruitful. Science can describe events microseconds following the Big Bang, offer an increasingly detailed account of matter and how to manipulate it, and uncover the biophysical and neurophysiological nuts and bolts of the brain and its pathologies. However, this same method has as yet failed to provide a satisfactory account of how fi rst-hand, subjective experience fi ts into the objective, physical universe. The brute fact of consciousness comes as a total surprise it does not appear to follow from any phenomena in traditional physics or biology. Indeed, some modern philosophers even argue that consciousness is not logically supervenient to physics Note that it is not yet generally accepted that consciousness is an appropriate subject of scientifi c inquiry. A number of neuroscience textbooks provide extended details about brains over hundreds of pages yet leave out what it feels like to be the owner of such an awake brain, a remarkable omission.People willingly concede that when it comes to nuclear physics or molecular biology, specialist knowledge is essential but many assume that there are few relevant facts about consciousness and therefore everybody is entitled to their own theory. Nothing could be further from the truth. There is an immense amount of relevant psychological, clinical, and neuroscientifi c data and observations that needs to be accounted for. Furthermore, the modern focus on the neuronal basis of consciousness in the brain-rather than on interminable philosophical debates-has given brain scientists tools to greatly increase our knowledge of the conscious mind.Consciousness is a state-dependent property of certain types of complex, biological, adaptive, and highly interconnected systems. The best example of consciousness is found in a healthy and attentive human brain, for example, the reader of this chapter. In deep sleep, consciousness ceases. Small lesions in the midbrain and thalamus can lead to a complete loss of consciousness, and destruction of circumscribed parts of the cerebral cortex can eliminate very specifi c aspects of consciousness, such as the ability to be aware of motion or to recognize faces, without a concomitant loss of vision in general.Brain scientists are exploiting a number of empirical approaches that shed light on the neural basis of consciousness. This chapter reviews these approaches and summarizes what has been learned.There are many defi nitions of consciousness What it feels like to have a particular experience is called the quale of that experience: the quale of red is what is common to such disparate conscious states as seeing a red sunset, the red fl ag of China, arterial blood, or a ruby gemstone. All four subjective states share "redness." There are countless qualia: the ways things look, sound, and smell, the way it feels to have a pain, the way it feels to have thoughts and desires and so on. To have an experience means to have qualia, and the quale of an experience is what specifi es it and makes it different from other experiences.A science of consciousness must explain the exact relationship between phenomenal, mental states, and brain states. This is the heart of the classical mindbody problem: What is the nature of the relationship between the immaterial, conscious mind and its physical basis in the electrochemical interactions in the body This problem can be divided into several subproblems:1. Why is there any experience at all Or, put differently, why does a brain state feel like anything In philosophy, this is referred to by some as the Hard Problem, or as the explanatory gap between the material, objective world and the subjective, phenomenal world A further aspect of the mind-body problem is the question of free will, a vast topic. Answering this question goes to the heart of the way people think of themselves. The spectrum of views ranges from the traditional and deeply embedded belief that we are free, autonomous, and conscious actors to the view that we are biological machines driven by needs and desires beyond conscious access and without willful control.Of great relevance are the classical fi ndings by Libet and colleagues of brain events that precede the conscious initiation of a voluntary action. In this elegant experiment, subjects were sitting in front of an oscilloscope, tracking a spot of light moving every 2.56 sec around a circle. Every now and then, "spontaneously," subjects had to carry out a specifi c voluntary action, here fl exing their wrist. If this action is repeated suffi ciently often while electrical activity around the vertex of the head is recorded, a readiness potential in the form of a sustained scalp negativity can be recorded long before the muscle starts to move. Libet asked subjects to silently note the position of the spot of light when they fi rst "felt the urge" to fl ex their wrist and to report this location afterward. This temporal marker for the awareness of willing an action occurs on average 200 msec before initiation of muscular action, in accordance with commonsense notions of the causal action of free will. However, the readiness potential can be detected at least 350 msec before awareness of the action. In other words, the subjects brain signals the action at least half a second before the subject feels that he or she has initiated it This simple result has been replicated but, because of its counterintuitive implication that conscious will has no causal role, continues to be vigorously debated Psychological work in both normal individuals as well as in patients reveals further dissociations between the conscious perception of a willed action and its actual execution: subjects believe that they perform actions that they did not do while, under different circumstances, subjects feel that they are not responsible for actions that are, demonstrably, their own Yet whether volition is illusory or is free in some libertarian sense does not answer the question of how subjective states relate to brain states. The perception of free will, what psychologists call the feeling of agency or authorship, is certainly a subjective state with an associated quale no different in kind from the quale of a toothache or seeing marine blue. So even if free will is a complete chimera, the subjective feeling of willing an action must have some neuronal correlate.Direct electrical brain stimulation during neurosurgery as well as fMRI experiments implicate medial premotor and anterior cingulate cortices in generating the subjective feeling of triggering an action Data about subjective states come not only from people that can talk about their subjective experiences but also from nonlinguistic competent individualsnewborn babies or patients with complete paralysis of nearly all voluntary muscles-and, most importantly, from animals other than humans. There are three reasons to assume that many species, in particular those with complex behaviors such as mammals, share at least some aspects of consciousness with humans: Similar neuronal architectures. Except for size, there are no large-scale, dramatic differences between the cerebral cortex and thalamus of mice, monkey, humans, and whales. In particular, the macaque monkey is a powerful model organism to study visual perception because it shares with the human visual system three distinct cone photopigments, binocular stereoscopic vision, a foveated retina and similar eye movements. Similar behavior. Almost all human behaviors have precursors in the animal literature. Take the case of pain. The behaviors seen in humans when they experience pain and distress-facial contortions, moaning, yelping, or other forms of vocalization motor activity such as writhing, avoidance behaviors at the prospect of a repetition of the painful stimulus-can be observed in all mammals and in many other species. Likewise for the physiological signals that attend painactivation of the sympathetic autonomous nervous system resulting in change in blood pressure, dilated pupils, sweating, increased heart rate, release of stress hormones, and so on. The discovery of cortical pain responses in premature babies shows the fallacy of relying on language as sole criteria for consciousness Although certain aspects of consciousness, in particular those relating to the recursive notion of self and to abstract, culturally transmitted knowledge, are not widespread in nonhuman animals, there is little reason to doubt that other mammals share conscious feelings-sentience-with humans. To believe that humans are special, are singled out by the gift of consciousness above all other species, is a remnant of humanitys atavistic, deeply held belief that homo sapiens occupies a privileged place in the universe, a belief with no empirical basis.The extent to which nonmammalian vertebrates, such as tuna, cichlid and other fi sh, crows, ravens, magpies, parrots and other birds, or even invertebrates, such as squids, or bees, with complex, nonstereotyped behaviors including delayed-matching, nonmatching-to-sample and other forms of learning There are two common, but quite distinct, usages of the term consciousness, one revolving around arousal and states of consciousness and another one around the content of consciousness and conscious states.To be conscious of anything, the brain must be in a relatively high state of arousal. This is as true of wakefulness as it is of REM sleep that is vividly, consciously experiencedthough usually not remembered-in dreams. The level of brain arousal, measured by electrical or metabolic brain activity, fl uctuates in a circadian manner, and is infl uenced by lack of sleep, drugs and alcohol, physical exertion, and so on in a predictable manner. High arousal states are always associated with some conscious state-a percept, thought or memory-that has a specifi c content. We see a face, hear music, remember an incident, plan an experiment, or fantasize about sex. Indeed, it is unlikely that one can be awake without being conscious of something. Referring to such conscious states is conceptually quite distinct from referring to states of consciousness that fl uctuate with different levels of arousal. Arousal can be measured behaviorally by the signal amplitude that triggers some criterion reaction.Different levels or states of consciousness are associated with different kinds of conscious experiences. The awake state in a normal functioning individual is quite different from the dreaming state or from the state of deep sleep. In all three cases, the basic physiology of the brain is changed, affecting the space of possible conscious experiences. Physiology is also different in altered states of consciousness, for instance after taking psychedelic drugs when events often have a stronger emotional connotation than in normal life. Yet another state of consciousness can occur during certain meditative practices, when conscious perception and insight may be enhanced compared to the normal waking state.In some obvious but diffi cult to rigorously defi ne manner, the richness of conscious experience increases as an individual transitions from deep sleep to drowsiness to full wakefulness. This richness of possible conscious experience could be quantifi ed using notions from complexity theory that incorporate both the dimensionality as well as the granularity of conscious experience These observations suggest a two-dimensional graph Global disorders of consciousness can likewise be mapped onto this plane. Clinicians speak of impaired states of consciousness as in "the comatose state," "the persistent vegetative state", and the "minimal conscious state". Here, state refers to different levels of consciousness, from a total absence in the case of coma, PVS or general anesthesia, to a fl uctuating and limited form of conscious sensation in MCS, sleep walking or during a complex partial epileptic seizure The repertoire of distinct conscious states or experiences that are accessible to a patient in MCS is presumably minimal, immeasurably smaller than the possible conscious states that can be experienced by a healthy brain. In the limit of brain death, the origin of this space has been reached with no experience at all Given the absence of any accepted theory for the minimal neuronal criteria necessary for consciousness, the distinction between a PVS patient-who shows regular sleep-wave transitions and who may be able to move eyes or limbs or smile in a refl exive manner as in the widely publicized 2005 case of Terri Schiavo in Florida-and a MCS patient who can communicate in a meaningful manner and who shows some signs of consciousness, is often diffi cult in a clinical setting. Functional brain imaging may prove immensely useful here.Blood-oxygen-level-dependent functional magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated that a patient in a vegetative state following a severe traumatic brain injury exhibited the same pattern of brain activity as normal individuals when asked to imagine playing tennis or to imagine visiting all the rooms in her house In contrast to diffuse cortical damage, relatively discrete bilateral injuries to midline subcortical structures can also cause a complete loss of consciousness. These structures are therefore part of the enabling factors that control the level of brain arousal and that are needed for any form of consciousness to occur. For an example, consider the heterogeneous collection of more than two dozen of nuclei in the upper brain stem, collectively referred to as the reticular activating system. These nuclei-threedimensional collections of neurons with their own cytoarchitecture and neurochemical identity-release distinct neuromodulators such as acetylcholine, noradrenalinenorepinephrine, serotonin, histamine, and orexinhypocretin. Their axons project widely throughout the brain Other enabling factors for consciousness are the fi ve or more intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus. These receive input from many brain stem nuclei and from frontal cortex and project strongly to the basal ganglia and, in a more distributed manner, into layer I of much of neocortex. Comparatively small, bilateral lesions in the ILN can completely eliminate awareness If a single substance is critical for consciousness, then acetylcholine is the most likely candidate. Two major cholinergic pathways originate in the brain stem and in the basal forebrain FIGURE 53.1 Normal and pathological brain states can be situated in a two-dimensional graph. Here increasing levels of behaviorally determined arousal is plotted on the x-axis and the "richness" or "representational capacity of consciousness" is plotted on the y-axis. Increasing arousal can be measured by the threshold to obtain some specifi c behavior. Healthy subjects cycle during a 24-hour period from deep sleep with low arousal and very little conscious experience to increasing levels of arousal and conscious sensation. In REM sleep, low levels of behavioral arousal go hand-in-hand with vivid consciousness. Conversely, various pathologies of clinical relevance are associated with little to no conscious content. Modifi ed from Cholinergic activity fl uctuates with the sleep-wake cycle. In general, increasing levels of spiking activity in cholinergic neurons is associated with wakefulness or REM sleep, and decreasing levels occur during non-REM or slow-wave sleep. Lastly, many neurological pathologies whose symptoms include disturbances of consciousness, such as Parkinsons disease, Alzheimers disease, and other forms of dementia, are associated with a selective loss of cholinergic neurons.In summary, a plethora of nuclei with distinct chemical signatures in the thalamus, midbrain, and pons must function for the brain of an individual to be suffi ciently aroused to experience anything at all. These nuclei belong to the enabling factors for consciousness. It is likely that the specifi c content of any one conscious sensation is mediated by neurons in cortex and their associated satellite structures, including the amygdala, thalamus, claustrum, and the basal ganglia.Progress in addressing the mind-body problem has come from focusing on empirically accessible questions rather than on eristic philosophical arguments with no clear resolution. One key objective has been to search for the neuronal correlates-and ultimately the causes-of consciousness. As defi ned by This defi nition of the NCC stresses the word "minimal," because the question of interest is which subcomponents of the brain actually are needed. For instance, it is likely that neural activity in the cerebellum does not underlie any conscious perception, and thus is not part of the NCC. That is, trains of spikes in Purkinje cells will not induce a sensory percept although they may ultimately affect some behaviors.This defi nition does not focus on the necessary conditions for consciousness, because of the great redundancy and parallelism found in neurobiological networks. While activity in some population of neurons may underpin a percept in one case, a different population might mediate a related percept if the former population is lost or inactivated.Every phenomenal, subjective state will have associated NCC: one for seeing a red patch, another one for seeing grandmother, yet a third one for hearing a siren, and so on. Perturbing or inactivating the NCC for any one specifi c conscious experience will affect the percept or cause it to disappear respectively. If the NCC could be induced artifi cially, for instance by cortical microstimulation in a prosthetic device or during neurosurgery, the subject will experience the associated percept.What characterizes the NCC What are the communalities between the NCC for seeing and for hearing Will the NCC involve all pyramidal neurons in cortex at any given point in time Or only a subset of long-range projection cells in the frontal lobes that project to the sensory cortices in the back Only layer 5 cortical cells Neurons that fi re in a rhythmic manner Neurons that fi re in a synchronous manner These are some of the proposals that have been advanced over the years The possibility of precisely manipulating visual percepts in time and space has made vision a preferred modality for seeking the NCC. Psychologists have perfected a number of techniques-masking, binocular rivalry, continuous fl ash suppression, motion-induced blindness, change blindness, inattentional blindnessin which the seemingly simple and unambiguous relationship between a physical stimulus in the world and its associated percept in the privacy of the subjects mind is disrupted A perceptual illusion that can be precisely controlled is binocular rivalry does not allow for the simultaneous perception of both images. Macaque monkeys can be trained to report whether they see the left or the right image. The distribution of the switching times and the way in which changing the contrast in one eye affects the reports, leaves little doubt that monkeys and humans experience the same basic phenomenon. In a series of elegant experiments, Logothetis and colleagues Does this mean that the NCC is local to IT At this point, this is not clear. However, given known anatomical connections, it is possible that specifi c reciprocal interactions between IT cells and neurons in parts of the prefrontal cortex are necessary for the NCC. This is compatible with the broadly accepted notion that the NCC must involve positive feedback to insure that neural activity is persistent and strong enough to exceed some threshold and to be broadly distributed to multiple cognitive systems, including working memory, planning, and language.  the visual input, with dotted vertical boundaries marking stimulus transitions. The second row shows the individual spikes, the third the smoothed fi ring rate, and the bottom row the monkeys behavior. The animal was taught to press a lever when it saw either one or the other image, but not both. The cell responded only weakly to either the sunburst design or to its optical superposition with the image of a monkeys face. During binocular rivalry between 5 and 18 seconds, the monkeys perception vacillated back and forth between seeing the face and seeing the bursting sun. Perception of the face was consistently accompanied by a strong increase in fi ring rate. From N. Logothetis as modifi ed by In a related perceptual phenomena, fl ash suppression, the percept associated with an image projected into one eye is suppressed by fl ashing another image into the other eye. Its methodological advantage over binocular rivalry is that the timing of the perceptual transition is determined by an external trigger rather than by an internal event. The majority of responsive cells in inferior temporal cortex and in the superior temporal sulcus follow the monkeys behavior, and therefore its percept. That is, when the animal perceives a cells preferred stimulus, the neuron fi res when the stimulus is present on the retina but is perceptually suppressed, the cell falls silent, even though legions of V1 neurons fi re vigorously to the same stimulus A number of fMRI experiments have exploited binocular rivalry and related illusions to identify the hemodynamic activity underlying visual consciousness in humans. They demonstrate quite conclusively that BOLD activity in the upper stages of the ventral pathway follow the percept and not simply the retinal stimulus There is a lively debate about the extent to which neurons in primary visual cortex simply encode the visual stimulus or are directly responsible for expressing the subjects conscious percept. That is, is V1 part of the NCC In a powerful combination of binocular rivalry and fl ash suppression, a stationary image in one eye can be suppressed for minutes on end by continuously fl ashing different images into the other eye The attributes of even simple percepts seem to vary along a continuum. For instance, a patch of color has a brightness and a hue that are variable, just as a simple tone has an associated loudness and pitch. However, is it possible that each particular, consciously experienced, percept is all-or-none Might a pure tone of a particular pitch and loudness be experienced as an atom of perception, either heard or not, rather than gradually emerging from the noisy background The perception of the world around us would then be a superposition of many elementary, binary percepts Is perception continuous, like a river, or does it consist of series of discontinuous batches, rather like the discrete frames in a movie Many actions in response to sensory inputs are rapid, transient, stereotyped, and unconscious It seems possible that visual zombie modes in the cortex mainly use the dorsal stream in the parietal region Contrariwise, conscious perception is believed to require more sustained, reverberatory neural activity, most likely via global feedback from frontal regions of neocortex back to sensory cortical areas in the back In brief, while rapid but transient neural activity in the thalamo-cortical system can mediate complex behavior without conscious sensation it is surmised that consciousness requires sustained but wellorganized neural activity dependent on long-range cortico-cortical feedback.At present, it is not known to what extent animals whose nervous systems have an architecture considerably different from the mammalian neocortex are conscious. Furthermore, whether artifi cial systems, such as computers, robots, or the World Wide Web as a whole, which behave with considerable intelligence, are or can become conscious, remains completely speculative. What is needed is a theory of consciousness, which explains in quantitative terms what type of systems, with what architecture, can possess conscious states.Progress in the study of the NCC on the one hand, and of the neural correlates of nonconscious zombie behaviors on the other, will hopefully lead to a better understanding of what distinguishes neural structures or processes that are associated with consciousness from those that are not. Yet such an opportunistic, data-driven approach will not lead to an understanding of why certain structures and processes have a privileged relationship with subjective experience. For example, why is it that neurons in corticothalamic circuits are essential for conscious experience, whereas cerebellar neurons, despite their huge numbers, are not And what aspect of cortical zombie systems make them unsuitable to yield subjective experience Or why is it that consciousness wanes during slow-wave sleep early in the night, despite levels of neural fi ring in the thalamocortical system that are comparable to the levels of fi ring in wakefulnessInformation theory may be such a theoretical approach that establishes at the fundamental level what consciousness is, how it can be measured, and what requisites a physical system must satisfy in order to generate it The most promising candidate for such a theoretical framework is the information integration theory of consciousness Furthermore, information associated with the occurrence of a conscious state is integrated information. An experience of a particular conscious state is an integrated whole. It cannot be subdivided into components that are experienced independently Based on these and other considerations, the theory claims that a physical system can generate consciousness to the extent that it can integrate information. This idea requires that the system has a large repertoire of available states yet cannot be decomposed into a collection of causally independent subsystems.Importantly, the theory introduces a measure of a systems capacity to integrate information. This measure, called f, is obtained by determining the minimum repertoire of different states that can be produced in one part of the system by perturbations of its other parts The notion that consciousness has to do with the brains ability to integrate information has been tested directly by transcranial magnetic stimulation. In TMS a coil is placed above the skull and a brief and intense magnetic fi eld generates a weak electrical current in the underlying gray matter in a noninvasive manner. Ever since the Greeks fi rst considered the mindbody problem more than two millennia ago, it has been the domain of armchair speculations and esoteric debates with no apparent resolution. Yet many aspects of this ancient set of questions now fall squarely within the domain of science.In order to advance the resolution of these and similar questions, it will be imperative to record from a large number of neurons simultaneously at many locations throughout the cortico-thalamo system and related satellites such as the claustrum The growing ability of neuroscientists to manipulate in a reversible, transient, deliberate, and delicate manner identifi ed populations of neurons in the mouse, and thereby affecting its behavior, using combined genetic and optical tools It is the combination of such fi ne-grained neuronal analysis in mice and monkeys, ever more sensitive psychophysical and brain imaging techniques in patients and healthy individuals, and the development of a robust theoretical framework that lend hope to the belief that human ingenuity can, ultimately, understand in a rational manner one of the central mysteries of life. 