Copyright Private Company Technology Centeradhesion molecules with axon growth is based upon experiments either in vitro, where addition or removal of a particular molecule results in modifying the relevant behavior of growing axons, or in vivo where genetic mutation, deletion or manipulation disrupts the growth, guidance or targeting of a particular axon projection (see Box A).Despite their daunting number, molecules that are known to influence axon growth and guidance can be grouped into families of ligands and their receptors fibronectin to integrins triggers a cascade of events-perhaps via interactions with cytoplasmic kinases and other soluble signaling molecules-that generally stimulates growth and elongation. These changes include fluctuations in levels of intracellular messengers such as calcium and inositol trisphosphate (IP 3 ), and the activation of additional intracellular kinase pathways (see Chapter 7). The role of extracellular matrix molecules in axon guidance is particularly clear in the embryonic periphery. Axons extending through peripheral tissues grow through loosely arrayed mesenchymal cells that fill the interstices of the embryo, and the spaces between these mesenchymal cells are rich in extracellular matrix molecules. Axons also grow along the interface of mesenchyme and epithelial tissues including the epidermis, where an organized sheet of extracellular matrix components called the basal lamina provides a supportive substrate.In addition, in peripheral nerves, matrix molecules are secreted by glial cells (Schwann cells) associated with growing axons. In tissue culture as well as in the embryo, different extracellular matrix molecules have different capacities to stimulate axon growth. Thus, the relative availability of different matrix molecules can influence the speed or direction of a growing axon. The role of matrix molecules in the central nervous system is less clear. Some of the same molecules are present in the extracellular space but are not organized into orderly substrates like the basal lamina in the periphery, and have therefore been harder to study.Contact-mediated attraction The CAMs and cadherins are distinguished by their presence on both growing axons and growth cones as well as surrounding cells or targets (see The importance of adhesive interactions in axon growth and guidance mediated by these molecules is underscored by the pathogenesis of several inherited human developmental or neurological disorders. These syndromes-X-linked hydrocephalus, MASA (an acronym for mental retardation, aphasia, shuffling gait, and adducted thumbs), Kalman's syndrome (which compromises reproductive and chemosensory function) and X-linked spastic paraplegia-are all consequences of mutations in genes encoding cell surface adhesion molecules. These mutations can also lead to the absence of the corpus callosum, which connects the two cerebral hemispheres, and of the corticospinal tract, which carries cortical information to the spinal cord. Congenital anomalies such as these (which are fortunately rare) are now understood to arise from errors in the signaling mechanisms normally responsible for axon navigation via cell surface adhesion molecules.Another major challenge in establishing appropriate patterns of connectivity is attracting axons to distant targets, and insuring that the axons do not stray into inappropriate regions en route. Several additional molecules are responsible for this aspect of axon growth and guidance. With remarkable foresight, Cajal proposed early in the twentieth century that target-derived signals selectively influenced axonal growth cones, thereby attracting them to appropriate destinations. In addition to the chemoattraction predicted by Cajal, it was long supposed that there might also be chemorepellent signals that discouraged axon growth toward a particular region. Despite the clear importance of chemoattraction and repulsion in constructing pathways and circuits, the identity of the signals themselves remained uncertain until the last 15 years or so. One problem was the vanishingly small amounts of such factors expressed in the developing embryo. Another was that of distinguishing tropic molecules-which guide growing axons toward a sourcefrom trophic molecules-which support the survival and growth of neurons and their processes once an appropriate target has been contacted (see below). These problems were solved by laborious biochemical purification and analysis of attractive or repulsive activities from vertebrate (chick) embryos, and genetic analysis of axon growth in both Drosophila and C. elegans; this work eventually led to the identification of several genes that code for chemotropic factors. Remarkably, the identity and function of chemoattractants and chemorepellents across phyla is highly conserved.The best-characterized class of chemoattractant molecules is the netrins (from the Sanskrit "to guide"; Much of the research on axon guidance has focused on molecules that encourage axon outgrowth or attract growing neurons. Constructing the nervous system, however, also entails telling axons where not to grow. Two broad classes of chemorepellent molecules have been described. The first is associated with central nervous system myelin. These molecules-referred to as the NoGo's-and their receptors are evidently important after injury to the adult brain, where they inhibit axon growth at regions of CNS damage (see Chapter 24); however, their role in initial axon growth and guidance is less clear. In addition to the NoGo's, some protein components of the myelin sheath, including myelin basic protein, also can be chemorepulsive for growing axons. Molecules belonging to the second class of chemorepellents are active during neural development. These molecules, called semaphorins (semaphor is the Greek word for "signal"; see Much of the initial characterization of semaphorin chemorepellent activity emerged from studies of invertebrates-particularly Drosophila-where mutation or manipulation of these genes can cause axons to grow abnormally. Studies with cultured vertebrate neurons indicated that the semaphorins can cause collapse of growth cones and cessation of axon extension. The activity of these molecules in developing vertebrates, however, has been harder to demonstrate in vivo. For example, inappropriate growth or targeting of axons is not apparent when single semaphorin genes are deleted in mice; nevertheless, local introduction of semaphorins can lead to altered axon trajectories due to avoidance of the exogenous semaphorin. The semaphorins represent the largest family of chemorepellants. None of these molecules alone, however, explains the initial choices and resulting trajectories of developing axons. It is nonetheless clear that the semaphorins make an important contribution to the orderly construction of axon pathways in both the periphery and in the central nervous system.In the somatic sensory, visual, and motor systems, neuronal connections are arranged such that neighboring points in the periphery are represented at similarly adjacent locations in the appropriate regions of the central nervous system (see In the early 1960s, Roger Sperry, who later did pioneering work on the functional specialization of the cerebral hemispheres (see Chapter 26), articulated the chemoaffinity hypothesis, based primarily on work in the visual system of frogs and goldfish. In these animals, the terminals of retinal ganglion cells form a precise topographic map in the optic tectum (the tectum is homologous to the mammalian superior colliculus). When Sperry crushed the optic nerve and allowed it to regenerate (fish and amphibians, unlike mammals, can regenerate axonal tracts in their central nervous system; see Chapter 24), he found that retinal axons reestablished the same pattern of connections in the tectum. Even if the eye was rotated 180°, the regenerating axons grew back to their original tectal destinations (causing some behavioral confusion for the frog: A likely candidate for the negative guidance signal for temporal axons in the posterior tectum was subsequently purified, and its gene cloned. The protein-initially called RAGS (repulsive axon guidance signal) and later renamed ephrin-A5-belongs to a family of ephrin ligands and Eph receptors (see After reaching the correct target or target region, axons must make a further local determination about which particular cells to innervate among a variety of potential local synaptic partners. The choices available to an axon include: establish synaptic contacts; retract and regrow to another target; or fail to form stable connections (a choice that can result in the death of the parent neuron). Because of the complexity of brain circuitry, this issue has been studied most thoroughly in the peripheral nervous system, particularly in the innervation of muscle fibers (Box B) and autonomic ganglion cells by spinal cord motor neurons. Synaptic specificity was first explored by British physiologist John Langley at the end of the nineteenth century. Preganglionic sympathetic neurons located at different levels of the spinal cord innervate cells in sympathetic chain ganglia in a stereotyped and selective manner Subsequent studies based on intracellular recordings from individual neurons in the superior cervical ganglion have shown, however, that the selective affinities between pre-and postsynaptic neurons are not especially restrictive. Thus, synaptic connections to ganglion cells made by preganglionic neurons of a particular spinal level are preferred, but synaptic contacts from neurons at other levels are not excluded (much like the rules that govern axon guidance). Furthermore, if the innervation to the superior cervical ganglion from a particular spinal level is surgically interrupted, recordings made some weeks later indicate that new connections are established by residual axons arising from what would normally be inappropriate spinal segments. The novel connections also establish a pattern of segmental preferences, as if the system had attempted to achieve the best match it could under the altered circumstances. Despite this relative selectivity during synapse formation, a quite different line of work has shown that where a synapse forms on the target cell (at least if the cell is a muscle fiber) is tightly controlled by a set of molecules that are now understood in some detail (see Box B). Perhaps not surprisingly, these molecules include variants of several of the cell adhesion molecules that influence growth cone behavior (see below).There are some absolute restrictions to synaptic associations. Thus, neurons do not innervate nearby glial or connective tissue cells, and many instances have been described in which various nerve and target cell types show little or no inclination to establish connections with one another. When synaptogenesis does proceed, however, neurons and their targets in both the central and peripheral nervous systems appear to associate according to a continuously variable system of preferences-much like the old song "if you can't be with the one you love, love the one you're with." Such biases guide the pattern of innervation that arises in development (or reinnervation) without limiting it in any absolute way. The target cells residing in muscles, autonomic ganglia, or elsewhere are certainly not equivalent, but neither are they unique with respect to the innervation they can receive. This relative promiscuity can cause problems following neural injury, since regenerated patterns of peripheral innervation are not always appropriate (see Chapter 24).Several observations show that many of the same adhesion molecules that participate in axon guidance contribute to the identification and stabilization of a synaptic site on target cells, as well as to the ability of a growing axon to recognize specific sites as optimal. Ephrins have been suggested to contribute to this process, as have cadherins. In both cases the diversity of ligands and receptors makes these adhesion molecule families attractive candi- .7 Evidence that synaptic connections between mammalian neurons form according to specific affinities between different classes of pre-and postsynaptic cells. In the superior cervical ganglion, preganglionic neurons located in particular spinal cord segments (T1, for example) innervate ganglion cells that project to particular peripheral targets (the eye, for example). Establishment of these preferential synaptic relationships indicates that selective neuronal affinities are a major determinant of neural connectivity.dates. This speculation has an intriguing parallel in Drosophila. In the fly, the gene for the cell adhesion molecule DSCAM (the fly ortholog of the mammalian down syndrome cell adhesion molecule, the gene for which is located on chromosome 21, the chromosome that is duplicated in Down syndrome) has approximately 38,000 isoforms based upon the numbers of exons in the gene and predicted splicing Synapses require a precise organization of presynaptic and postsynaptic elements in order to function properly (see . At the neuromuscular junction, for example, synaptic vesicles and the related release machinery are located at sites in the nerve terminal called active zones; and, in the postsynaptic muscle cell, acetylcholine receptors and other synapse-specific molecules are localized in high density exactly subjacent to the presynaptic active zones. During the past 25 years, a number of investigators have identified some of the molecular cues that guide the formation of these carefully apposed elements. Their efforts have met with the greatest success at the neuromuscular junction, where a molecule called agrin is now known to be responsible for initiating some of the events that lead to the formation of a fully functional synapse.Agrin was originally identified as a result of its influence in the reinnervation of frog neuromuscular junctions following damage to the motor nerve. In mature skeletal muscle, each fiber typically receives a single synaptic contact at a highly specialized region called the end plate (see Chapter 5). U. J. McMahan, Josh Sanes, and their colleagues at Harvard and later Stanford and Washington Universities found that regenerating axons reinnervate the original end plate site precisely. In seeking to determine the molecular signals underlying this phenomenon, they took advantage of the fact that each muscle fiber is surrounded by a sheath of extracellular matrix called the basal lamina. When muscle fibers degenerate, they leave the basal lamina behind (as do degenerating axons); moreover, a specific infolding of the basal lamina at the former end plate site allows its continued identification. Remarkably, presynaptic nerve terminals differentiate at these original sites even when the associated muscle fibers are absent. Equally remarkable is that regenerating muscle fibers form postsynaptic specializations-such as densely packed acetylcholine receptors-at precisely these same basal lamina locations in the absence of nerve fibers! These findings show that the signal(s) guiding synapse formation remain in the extracellular environment after removal of either nerve or muscle, presumably in the basal lamina "ghost" that surrounds each muscle fiber.Using a bioassay based on the aggregation of acetylcholine receptors to analyze the constituents of the basal lamina,  Why should neurons depend so strongly on their targets, and what specific cellular and molecular interactions mediate this dependence? The answer to the first part of this question lies in the changing scale of the developing nervous system and the body it serves, and the related need to precisely match the number of neurons in particular populations with the size of their targets. The basic mechanisms by which neurons are initially generated have already been considered in Chapter 21. There is, however, one more issue in generating the final complement of neurons. A generaland surprising-strategy in the development of vertebrates is the production of an initial surplus of nerve cells (on the order of two-or threefold); the final population is subsequently established by the death of those neurons that fail to interact successfully with their intended targets (see below). The elimination of supernumerary neurons is now known to be mediated by neurotrophic factors.Evidence that targets play a major role in determining the size of the neuronal populations that innervate them has come from an ongoing series of studies dating from the start of the twentieth century. The seminal observation was that the removal of a limb bud from a chick embryo results, at later embryonic stages, in a striking reduction in the number of nerve cells (α motor neurons) in the corresponding portions of the spinal cord ( Once neuronal populations are established by this winnowing, trophic interactions continue to modulate the formation of synaptic connections, beginning in embryonic life and extending far beyond birth. Among the problems that must be solved during the establishment of innervation is ensuring that each target cell is innervated by the right number of axons, and that each axon innervates the right number of target cells. Getting these numbers right is another major achievement of trophic interactions between developing neurons and target cells, and is necessary for establishing appropriate circuits to support specific functional demands of each individual organism. Studying synaptic refinement in the complex circuitry of the cerebral cortex or other regions of the central nervous system is a formidable challenge. As a result, many basic ideas about the ongoing modification of developing brain circuitry have come from simpler, more accessible systems, most notably the vertebrate neuromuscular junction and autonomic ganglion cells At birth shown that the elimination of some initial inputs to muscle and ganglion cells is a process in which synapses originating from different neurons compete with one another for "ownership" of an individual target cell (see Box B). Importantly, such competition is thought to be modulated by patterns of electrical activity in the pre-and postsynaptic partners. For example, if acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular junction are blocked by curare (a potent antagonist of the acetylcholine receptor; see Chapter 6), polyneuronal innervation persists. Blocking presynaptic action potentials in the motor neuron axons (by silencing the nerve with tetrodotoxin, a sodium channel blocker) also prevents the reduction of polyneuronal innervation. Blocking neural activity, therefore, reduces (or delays) competitive interactions and the associated synaptic rearrangements.The object of this competition is not known. Some of the phenomena of activity-dependent competition in muscles and autonomic ganglia (as well as in more complex central nervous system structures) could be explained by postulating that (1) synapses require a certain minimal level of trophic support to persist, (2) the relevant factors are secreted in limited amounts by the postsynaptic (target) cells in response to synaptic activation, and (3) synapses can only avail themselves of trophic support if their activity and that of the target cell coincide. There is, however, little direct evidence for this scenario. Equally plausible is the idea that active synapses provide a destabilizing signal that weakens asynchronously firing inputs. Thus, how activity achieves its effects on synaptic connectivity remains a key question.The most useful insights into the nature of synaptic rearrangement during development have come from direct observation of this process ( (C) This image illustrates the outcome of synaptic competition just after the losing axon (green) has withdrawn, leaving a red axon and its terminal. Note that the "loser" (green axon) has a retraction bulb at the end (arrow), and the "winning" axon (red) is significantly thicker.(Courtesy of J. W. A generally similar reorganization of synaptic innervation is evident in a variety of other peripheral and central nervous system regions. In the peripheral nervous system, the number of presynaptic axons innervating each neuron can also decrease, as demonstrated by studies of certain autonomic ganglia. A similar process has been described in the central nervous system. In the cerebellum, each adult Purkinje cell is innervated by a single climbing fiber (see Chapter 18); however, during early development, each Purkinje cell receives multiple climbing fiber inputs. Finally, in the visual cortex, initial binocular innervation of cells is eliminated to establish segregated molecularly driven inputs (see Chapter 23). The pattern of synaptic connections that emerges in the adult is not simply a consequence of the biochemical identities of synaptic partners or other determinate developmental rules. Rather, the mature wiring plan is the result of a much more flexible process in which neuronal connections are formed, removed, and remodeled according to local circumstances that reflect molecular constraints as well as ongoing electrical activity. These interactions guarantee that every target cell is innervated-and continues to be innervated-by the right number of inputs and synapses, and that every innervating axon contacts the right number of target cells with an appropriate number of synaptic endings. Thus, the regulation of convergence (the number of inputs to a target cell) and divergence (the number of connections made by a neuron) in the developing nervous system is another key consequence of trophic interactions among neurons and their targets. The regulation of convergence and divergence by neurotrophic interactions is also importantly influenced by the form of neurons, particularly the elaboration of dendrites (Box C), a feature that is also subject to neurotrophic control (see below).Thus, trophic interactions regulate three essential steps in the formation of mature neural circuits: matching numbers of afferents to the available target space; regulating the degree of innervation of individual afferents and their postsynaptic partners, and modulating the growth and shape of axonal and dendritic branches.The three major functions of neurotrophic signaling-survival of a subset of neurons from a considerably larger population, subsequent formation and maintenance of appropriate numbers of connections, and the elaboration of axonal and dendritic branches to support these connections-can be rationalized in part by the supply and availability of trophic factors. These rules entail several general assumptions about neurons and their targets (which may be other neurons, muscles, or other peripheral structures). First, neurons depend on the availability of some minimum amount of trophic factor for survival, and subsequently for the persistence of appropriate numbers of target connections. Second, target tissues synthesize and make available to developing neurons appropriate trophic factors. Third, targets produce trophic factors in limited amounts; in consequence, the survival of developing neurons (and later, the persistence of neuronal connections and growth and further differentiation of neurons) depends on neuronal competition forPerhaps the most striking feature of neurons is their diverse morphology. Some classes of neurons have no dendrites at all; others have a modest dendritic arborization; still others have an arborization that rivals the complex branching of a fully mature tree (see Figures 1.2 and 1.6). Why should this be? Although there are many reasons for this diversity, neuronal geometry influences the number of different inputs that a target neuron receives by modulating competitive interactions among the innervating axons.Evidence that the number of inputs a neuron receives depends on its geometry has come from studies of the peripheral autonomic system, where it is possible to stimulate the full complement of axons innervating an autonomic ganglion and its constituent neurons. This approach is not usually feasible in the central nervous system because of the anatomical complexity of most central circuits. Since individual postsynaptic neurons can also be labeled via an intracellular recording electrode, electrophysiological measurements of the number of different axons innervating a neuron can routinely be correlated with target cell shape. In both parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglia, the degree of preganglionic convergence onto a neuron is proportional to its dendritic complexity. Thus, neurons that lack dendrites altogether are generally innervated by a single input, whereas neurons with increasingly complex dendritic arborizations are innervated by a proportionally greater number of different axons (see A neuron innervated by a single axon will clearly be more limited in the scope of its responses than a neuron innervated by 100,000 inputs (1 to 100,000 is the approximate range of convergence in the mammalian brain). By regulating the number of inputs that neurons receive, dendritic form greatly influences function. There is a strong correlation between dendritic geometry and input number. (After Support for the idea that NGF is important for neuronal survival in more physiological circumstances emerged from a number of further observations. Depriving developing mice of NGF by the chronic administration of an NGF antiserum or other strategies resulted in adult mice lacking most NGFdependent neurons The ability of NGF to support neuronal survival (and of NGF deprivation to enhance cell death) is not in itself unassailable proof of a physiological role for this factor in development. In particular, these observations provided no direct evidence for NGF synthesis by (and uptake from) neuronal targets. This gap was filled by another series of ingenious experiments in several laboratories that showed NGF to be present in sympathetic targets, and to be quantitatively correlated with the density of sympathetic innervation. Furthermore, messenger RNA for NGF was demonstrated in targets innervated by sympathetic and sensory ganglia, but not in the ganglia themselves or in targets innervated by other types of nerve cells. As might be expected from such specificity, the NGF-sensitive neurons were also shown to have receptor molecules for the trophic factor (see next section). Importantly, the NGF message appears only after ingrowing axons have reached their targets; this fact makes it unlikely that secreted NGF acts in vivo as a chemotropic (guidance) molecule (like netrins and other cell adhesion molecules discussed earlier). Finally, the great majority of sympathetic neurons are lacking in mice in which the gene encoding NGF has been deleted.In sum, several decades of work in a number of laboratories have shown that NGF mediates cell survival among two specific neuronal populations in birds and mammals (sympathetic neurons and a subpopulation of sensory ganglion cells). These observations include the death of the relevant neurons in the absence of NGF; the survival of a surplus of neurons in the presence of augmented levels of the factor; the presence and production of NGF in neuronal targets; and the existence of receptors for NGF in innervating nerve terminals. Indeed, these observations define the criteria that must be satisfied in order to conclude that a given molecule is indeed a neurotrophic factor.Although NGF remains the most thoroughly studied neurotrophic factor, it was apparent from the outset that only certain classes of nerve cells respond to NGF. Work from a number of laboratories in the late 1980's and early 1990's has shown that NGF is only one member of a family of related trophic molecules, the neurotrophins. At present, there are three well-char- Construction of Neural Circuits 551 During the 30 years or so that work with NGF showed it to fulfill all the criteria for a target-derived neurotrophic factor (see text), it became clear that NGF affected only a few specific populations of peripheral neurons. It was therefore presumed that other neurotrophic factors must exist that followed similar rules, but supported the survival and growth of other classes of neurons. In particular, whereas NGF was shown to be secreted by the peripheral targets of primary sensory and sympathetic neurons, other factors were presumably produced by target neurons in the brain and spinal cord that supported the central projections of sensory neurons.The serendipity of the mouse salivary gland and its extraordinary levels of NGF was not repeated for these additional factors, however, and the hunt for the neurotrophic factors presumed to act in the central nervous system proved to be a long and arduous one. Indeed, it was not until the 1980s that the pioneering work of Yves Barde, Hans Thoenen, and their colleagues succeeded in identifying and purifying a factor from the brain that they named brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). As with NGF, this factor was purified on the basis of its ability to promote the survival and neurite outgrowth of sensory neurons. However, BDNF is expressed at such vanishingly small levels that over a million-fold purification was necessary before the protein could be identified! Thereafter, microsequencing and recombinant DNA technology allowed rapid progress even from the scant amounts of purified BDNF protein that were available. By 1989, Barde's group had succeeded in cloning the cDNA for BDNF. Surprisingly-despite its entirely different origin and distinct neuronal specificity-BDNF turned out to be a close relative of NGF. Based on the homologies between the primary structures of NGF and BDNF, the following year six independent laboratories (including Barde's) reported the cloning of a third member of the neurotrophin family, neurotrophin-3 (NT-3). At present, four members of the neurotrophin family have been reported in a variety of vertebrate species (see text).Experiments on BDNF and other members of the neurotrophin family over last decade have supported the conclusion that the survival and growth of different neuronal populations in both the PNS and CNS is dependent on different neurotrophins, relationships that are mediated by expression of membrane receptors that are specific for each neurotrophin (see Thus, the part played by neurotrophins in the CNS remains much less certain. One possibility is that these neurotrophins are more involved in regulating neuronal differentiation and phenotype in the CNS than in supporting neuronal survival per se. In this regard, the expression of neurotrophins is tightly regulated by electrical and synaptic activity, suggesting that they may also influence experience-dependent processes during the formation of circuits in the CNS. Neurotrophins influence dendritic arbors in the developing cerebral cortex. The cell on the left was transfected with the gene for green fluorescent protein (GFP) alone, the one on the right with GFP plus the gene encoding BDNF. Within a day, BDNF-transfected neurons grow elaborate dendritic branches, reminiscent of the NGF-induced halo in peripheral ganglia (see All of the biological observations on neurotrophic interactions suggest that signaling via the neurotrophins will activate at least 3 different kinds of responses: cell survival/death, synapse stabilization/elimination, and process growth/retraction. This impression was initially generated by experiments that presented NGF to subsets of neural processes without exposing the cell body to the factor The selective actions of the neurotrophins arise from their interactions with two classes of receptors: the Trk (for tyrosine kinase) receptors and the p75 receptor. There are three Trk receptors, each of which is a single transmembrane protein with a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domain. TrkA is primarily a receptor for NGF, TrkB a receptor for BDNF and NT-4/5, and TrkC a receptor for NT-3 Neurons in the developing brain must integrate a variety of molecular signals in order to determine where to send their axons, whether to live or die, what cells to form synapses on, how many synapses to make, and whether  to retain them. Fixed and/or diffusible adhesive, chemotropic, chemorepulsive, and trophic molecules all regulate the trajectory of growing axons and the synaptic connections they make with target cells. These developmental interactions occur over weeks, months, and to some extent may continue at a low level over the entire lifetime of the animal-as body size and functional demands change. Cell adhesion molecules influence the initial targeting of axons to appropriate target zones by modulating the direction and extent of growth cone motility. The earliest effects of trophic agents are on cell survival and differentiation. Once the appropriate number of neurons is established, trophic signals continue to govern the establishment of neural connections, particularly the extent of axonal and dendritic arborizations. Defects in the early guidance of axons are responsible for a variety of congenital neurological syndromes, and conditions thought to reflect trophic dysfunction may underlie degenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson's disease. Understanding the molecular basis of axon guidance, synapse formation, and trophic signaling began a century ago and has now burgeoned into a broad effort that continues to identify additional factors and signaling pathways to illuminate their varied roles in both the developing and adult brain. A further goal that now seems within reach is the application of this knowledge to understanding a spectrum of previously intractable neurological diseases.  The rich diversity of human personalities, abilities, and behavior is undoubtedly generated by the uniqueness of individual human brains. These fascinating neurobiological differences among humans derive from both genetic and environmental influences. The first steps in the construction of the brain's circuitry-the establishment of distinct brain regions, the generation of neurons, the formation of major axon tracts, the guidance of growing axons to appropriate targets, and the initiation of synaptogenesis-rely largely on the intrinsic cellular and molecular processes described in the previous chapters. Once the basic patterns of brain connections are established, however, patterns of neuronal activity (including those that are elicited by experience) modify the synaptic circuitry of the developing brain. Neuronal activity generated by interactions with the outside world in postnatal life thus provides a mechanism by which the environment can influence brain structure and function. Many of the effects of activity are transduced via signaling pathways that modify levels of intracellular Ca 2+ and thus influence local cytoskeletal organization as well as gene expression (see Chapter 7). This activity-mediated influence on the developing brain is most consequential during temporal windows called critical periods. As humans and other mammals mature, the brain becomes increasingly refractory to the lessons of experience, and the cellular mechanisms that modify neural connectivity become less effective.The cellular and molecular mechanisms outlined in Chapters 21 and 22 construct a nervous system of impressive anatomical complexity. These mechanisms and their developmental consequences are sufficient to create some remarkably sophisticated innate or "instinctual" behaviors (see Box A in Chapter 30). For most animals, the behavioral repertoire, including foraging, fighting, and mating strategies, largely relies on patterns of connectivity established by intrinsic developmental mechanisms. However, the nervous systems of complex ("higher") animals, including humans, clearly adapt to and are influenced by the particular circumstances of an individual's environment. These environmental factors are especially influential in early life, during temporal windows called critical periods. In some cases, such as the acquisition of language, instructive influences from the environment are obviously required for the normal development of the behavior (i.e., exposure to the individual's native language). Moreover, some behaviors, such as imprinting in birds (Box A), are expressed only if animals have certain spe-Box AThe idea that animals already possess a set of behaviors appropriate for a world not yet experienced has always been difficult to accept. However, the preeminence of instinctual responses is obvious to any biologist who looks at what animals actually do. Perhaps the most thoroughly studied examples occur in young birds. Hatchlings emerge from the egg with an elaborate set of innate behaviors. First, of course, is the complex behavior that allows the chick to escape from the egg. Having emerged, a variety of additional abilities indicate how much early behavior is "preprogrammed" (see Box A in Chapter 30).In a series of seminal observations, Konrad Lorenz, working with geese, showed that goslings follow the first large, moving object that they see and hear during their first day of life. Although this object is normally the mother goose, Lorenz found that goslings can imprint on a wide range of animate and inanimate objects presented during this period, including Lorenz himself (see Imprinting is a two-way street, with parents (especially mothers) rapidly forming exclusive bonds with their offspring. This phenomenon is especially important in animals like sheep that live in large groups or herds and produce offspring at about the same time of year. Ewes have a critical period 2-4 hours after giving birth during which they imprint on the scent of their own lamb. Following this time, they rebuff approaches by other lambs.The relevance of this work to primates was underscored in the 1950s by Harry Harlow and his colleagues at the University of Wisconsin. Harlow isolated monkeys within a few hours of birth and raised them in the absence of either a natural mother or a human substitute. In the best-known of these experiments, the baby monkeys had one of two maternal surrogates: a "mother" constructed of a wooden frame covered with wire mesh that supported a nursing bottle, or a similarly shaped object covered with terrycloth. When presented with this choice, the baby monkeys preferred the terrycloth mother and spent much of their time clinging to it, even if the feeding bottle was with the wire mother. Harlow took this to mean that newborn monkeys have a built-in need for maternal care and have at least some innate idea of what a mother should be like. More recently, a number of other endogenous behaviors have been carefully studied in infant monkeys, including a naïve monkey's fear reaction to the presentation of certain objects (e.g., a snake) and the "looming" response (fear elicited by the rapid approach of any formidable object). Most of these built-in behaviors have analogs in human infants.Taken together, these observations make plain that many complicated behaviors, emotional responses, and other predilections are well established in the nervous system prior to any significant experience, and that the need for certain kinds of early experience for normal development is predetermined. These built-in behaviors and their neural substrates have presumably evolved to give newborns a better chance of surviving in a predictably dangerous world. cific experiences during a sharply restricted time in early postnatal (or posthatching; see Box A) development. On the other hand, critical periods for sensory and motor skills, or complex behaviors such as human language, are longer and much less well delimited.Despite the fact that critical periods vary widely in both the behaviors affected and their duration, they all share some basic properties. A critical period is defined as the time during which a given behavior is especially susceptible to, and indeed requires, specific environmental influences to develop normally. Once this period ends, the behavior is largely unaffected by subsequent experience (or even by the complete absence of the relevant experience). Conversely, failure to be exposed to appropriate stimuli during the critical period is difficult or in some cases impossible to remedy subsequently.While psychologists and ethologists (biologists who study the natural behavior of animals) have long recognized that early postnatal or posthatching life is a period of special sensitivity to environmental influences, their studies of critical periods focused on behavior. Work in the last few decades has increasingly examined the underlying changes in the relevant brain circuits and their mechanisms.Many animals communicate by means of sound, and some (humans and songbirds are examples) learn these vocalizations. There are, in fact, provocative similarities in the development of human language and birdsong (Box B). Many other animal vocalizations, like alarm calls in mammals and birds, are innate, and require no experience to be correctly produced. For example, quail raised in isolation or deafened at birth so that they never hear conspecifics nonetheless produce the full repertoire of species-specific vocalizations. In contrast, humans obviously require extensive postnatal experience to produce and decode speech sounds that are the basis of language. The various forms of early language exposure, including the "baby talk" that parents and other adults often use to communicate with children as they begin to acquire language may actually serve to emphasize important perceptual distinctions that facilitate proper language production and comprehension.Importantly, this linguistic experience, to be effective, must occur in early life. The requirement for perceiving and practicing language during a critical period is apparent in studies of language acquisition in congenitally deaf children. Whereas most babies begin producing speechlike sounds at about 7 months (babbling), congenitally deaf infants show obvious deficits in their early vocalizations, and such individuals fail to develop language if not provided with an alternative form of symbolic expression (such as sign language; see Chapter 26). If, however, these deaf children are exposed to sign language at an early age (from approximately six months onward), they begin to "babble" with their hands just as a hearing infant babbles audibly. This suggests that, regardless of the modality, early experience shapes language behavior Examples of pathological situations in which normal children were never exposed to a significant amount of language make the same point. In oneFigure 23.1 Manual "babbling" in two deaf infants raised by deaf, signing parents compared to manual babble in three hearing infants. Babbling was judged by scoring hand positions and shapes that showed some resemblance to the components of American Sign Language. In deaf infants, meaningful hand shapes increase as a percentage of manual activity between ages 10 and 14 months. Hearing children raised by hearing, speaking parents do not produce similar hand shapes. Anyone witnessing language development in a child cannot help but be amazed at how quickly learning takes place. This facility contrasts with the adult acquisition of a new language, which can be a painfully slow process that never produces complete fluency. In fact, many learned behaviors are acquired during a period in early life when experience exerts an especially potent influence on subsequent behavior. Particularly well characterized is the sensitive period for learning courtship songs by oscine songbirds such as canaries and finches. In these species, the quality of early sensory exposure is the major determinant of subsequent perceptual and behavioral capabilities. Furthermore, developmental periods for learning these and other behaviors are restricted during postnatal life, suggesting that the nervous system changes in some manner to become refractory to further experience. Understanding how critical periods are regulated has many implications, not least the possibility of reactivating this enhanced learning capacity in adults. Nonetheless, such periods are often highly specialized for the acquisition of species-typical behaviors and are not merely times of general enhanced learning.Avian song learning illustrates the interactions between intrinsic and environmental factors in this developmental process. Many birds sing to attract mates, but oscine songbirds are special in that their courtship songs are dependent on auditory and vocal experience. The sensitive period for song learning comprises an initial stage of sensory acquisition, when the juvenile bird listens to and memorizes the song of a nearby adult male tutor (usually of its own species), and a subsequent stage of vocal learning, when the young bird matches its own song to the now-memorized tutor model via auditory feedback. This sensory motor learning stage ends with the onset of sexual maturity, when songs become acoustically stable, or crystallized. In all species studied to date, young songbirds are especially impressionable during the first two months after hatching and then become refractory to further exposure to tutor song as they age. The impact of this early experience is profound, and the memory it generates can remain intact for months, and perhaps years, before the onset of the vocal practice phase. Even constant exposure to other songs after sensory acquisition during the sensitive period ends does not affect this memory: The songs heard during sensory acquisition, but not later, are those that the bird vocally mimics. Early auditory experience is crucial to the bird's Darwinian success. In the absence of a tutor, or if raised only in the presence of another species, birds produce highly abnormal "isolate" songs, or songs of the foster species, neither of which succeeds in attracting females of their own kind.Two other features of song learning indicate an intrinsic predisposition for this specialized form of vocal learning. First, juveniles often need to hear the tutor song only 10 or 20 times to then vocally mimic it many months later. Second, when presented with a variety of songs played from tape recordings that include their own and other species' songs, juvenile birds preferentially copy the song of their own species, even with no external reinforcement. These observations show that juveniles are not really ciably different speech elements (called phonemes) to produce spoken words (examples are the phonemes ba and pa in English; see Chapter 26). Very young human infants can perceive and discriminate between differences in all human speech sounds, and are not innately biased towards phonemes characteristic of any particular language. However, this universal perceptual capacity does not persist. For example, adult Japanese speakers cannot reliably distinguish between the r and l sounds in English, presumably because this phonemic distinction is not made in Japanese and thus not reinforced by experience during the critical period. Nonetheless, 4-month-old Japanese infants can make this discrimination as reliably as 4-month-olds raised in English-speaking households (as indicated by increased suckling frequency or head turning in the presence of a novel stimulus). By 6 months of age, however, infants begin to show preferences for phonemes in their native language over those in foreign languages, and by the end of their first year no longer respond robustly to phonetic elements peculiar to non-native languages. The ability to perceive these "naïve," but are innately biased to learn the songs of their own species over those of others. In short, intrinsic factors make the nervous system of oscine birds especially sensitive to songs that are speciestypical. It is likely that similar biases influence human language learning. phonemic contrasts, when attended to, evidently persists for several more years, as evidenced by the fact that children can learn to speak a second language without accent and with fluent grammar until about age 7 or 8. After this age, however, performance gradually declines no matter what the extent of practice or exposure Although critical periods for language and other distinctively human behaviors are in some ways the most compelling examples of this phenomenon, it is difficult if not impossible to study the underlying changes in the human brain. A much clearer understanding of how changes in connectivity might contribute to critical periods has come from studies of the developing visual system in experimental animals with highly developed visual abilities-particularly cats and monkeys. In an extraordinarily influential series of experiments, David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel found that depriving animals of normal visual experience during a restricted period of early postnatal life irreversibly alters neuronal connections (and functions) in the visual cortex. These observations provided the first evidence that the brain translates the effects of early experience (that is, patterns of neural activity) into more or less permanently altered wiring.To understand these experiments and their implications, it is important to review the organization and development of the mammalian visual system. Recall that information from the two eyes is first integrated in the primary visual (striate) cortex, where most afferents from the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus terminate (see Chapter 11). In some mammals-carnivores, anthropoid primates, and humans-the afferent terminals form an alternating series of eye-specific domains in cortical layer IV called ocular dominance columns and below layer IV integrate inputs from the left and right eyes and respond to visual stimuli presented to either eye. Ocular dominance is thus apparent in two related phenomena: the degree to which individual cortical neurons are driven by stimulation of one eye or the other, and domains (stripes) in cortical layer IV in which the majority of neurons are driven exclusively by one eye or the other. The clarity of these patterns of connectivity and the precision by which experience via the two eyes can be manipulated led to the series of experiments described in the following section that greatly clarified the neurobiological processes underlying critical periods.As described in Chapter 11, if an electrode is passed at a shallow angle through the cortex while the responses of individual neurons to stimulation of one or the other eye are being recorded, detailed assessment of ocular dominance can be made at the level of individual cells (see ipsilateral eye. Neurons driven equally well by either eye were assigned to group 4. Using this approach, they found that the ocular dominance distribution across the cortical layers in primary visual cortex is roughly Gaussian in a normal adult (cats were used in these experiments). Most cells were activated to some degree by both eyes, and about a quarter were more activated by either the contralateral or ipsilateral eye Hubel and Wiesel then asked whether this normal distribution of ocular dominance could be altered by visual experience. When they simply closed one eye of a kitten early in life and let the animal mature to adulthood (which takes about 6 months), a remarkable change was observed. Electrophysiological recordings now showed that very few cortical cells could be driven from the deprived eye; that is, the ocular dominance distribution had shifted such that nearly all cells were driven by the eye that had remained Following closure of one eye from 1 week after birth until 2.5 months of age (indicated by the bar underneath the graph), no cells could be activated by the deprived (contralateral) eye. Some cells could not be activated by either eye (NR). Note that the closed eye is opened at the time of the experimental observations, and that the recordings are not restricted to any particular cortical layer. (C) A much longer period of monocular deprivation in an adult cat has little effect on ocular dominance (although overall cortical activity is diminished). In this case, the contralateral eye was closed from 12 to 38 months of age. (A after Hubel and Wiesel interpreted these results as demonstrating a competitive interaction between the two eyes during the critical period (see Chapter 22).In summary, the cortical representation of both eyes starts out equal, and in a normal animal, this balance is retained if both eyes experience roughly comparable levels of visual stimulation. When, however, an imbalance in visual experience is induced by monocular deprivation, the active eye gains a competitive advantage and replaces many of the synaptic inputs from the closed eye, such that few if any neurons can be driven by the deprived eye (see The idea that a competitive imbalance underlies the altered distribution of inputs after deprivation has been confirmed by closing both eyes shortly after birth, thereby equally depriving all visual cortical neurons of normal experience during the critical period. The arrangement of ocular dominance The picture is quite different after monocular deprivation. This dark-field autoradiograph shows a reconstruction of several sections through layer IV of the primary visual cortex of a monkey whose right eye was sutured shut from 2 weeks of age to 18 months, when the animal was sacrificed. Two weeks before death, the normal (left) eye was injected with radiolabeled amino acids (see Box C). The columns related to the nondeprived eye (white stripes) are much wider than normal, whereas as those related to the deprived eye are shrunken. (A from These developmental phenomena in the visual system of experimental animals accord with clinical problems in children who have experienced similar deprivation. The loss of acuity, diminished stereopsis, and problems with fusion that arise from early deficiencies of visual experience is called amblyopia (from the Greek meaning "dim sight").In humans, amblyopia is most often the result of strabismus-a misalignment of the two eyes due to improper control of the direction of gaze by the eye muscles and referred to colloquially as "lazy eye." Depending on the muscles affected, the misalignment can produce convergent strabismus,  Another cause of visual deprivation in humans is cataracts. Cataracts, which can be caused by several congenital conditions, render the lens opaque. Diseases such as onchocerciasis ("river blindness," a parasitic infection caused by the nematode Onchocerca volvulus) and trachoma (caused by Chlamydia trachomatis, a small, bacteria-like organism) affect millions of people in undeveloped tropical regions, often inducing corneal opacity in one or both eyes. A cataract in one eye is functionally equivalent to monocular deprivation in experimental animals; left untreated in children, this defect also results in an irreversible effect on the visual acuity of the deprived eye. If either the cataract or corneal opacity is removed before about 4 months of age, however, the consequences of monocular deprivation are largely avoided. As expected from Hubel and Wiesel's work, bilateral cataracts, which are similar to binocular deprivation in experimental animals, produce less dramatic deficits even if treatment is delayed. Apparently, unequal competition during the critical period for normal vision (e.g., that caused by monocular deprivation) is more deleterious than the complete abrogation of visual input that occurs with binocular deprivation.In keeping with the findings in experimental animals, the visual abilities of individuals monocularly deprived of vision as adults (by cataracts or corneal scarring, for example) are much less affected, even after decades, when vision is restored (although there may be important psychological consequences of restoring sight after prolonged binocular blindness, as has been engagingly described by the neurologist Oliver Sacks among others). Nor is there any evidence of anatomical change in this circumstance. For instance, a patient whose eye was surgically removed in adulthood showed normal ocular dominance columns when his brain was examined postmortem many years later (see How, then, are differences in patterns of neural activity translated into changes in neural circuitry? In 1949, the psychologist D. O. Hebb hypothesized that coordinated activity of a presynaptic terminal and a postsynaptic neuron strengthens the synaptic connection between them. Hebb's postulate, as it has come to be known, was originally formulated to explain the cellular basis of learning and memory (see Chapter 24), but this general concept has been widely applied to situations that involve long-term modifications in synaptic strength, including those that occur during development of neural circuits. In this context, Hebb's postulate implies that synaptic terminals strengthened by correlated activity will be retained or sprout new branches, whereas those that are persistently weakened by uncorrelated activity will eventually lose their hold on the postsynaptic cell Monocular deprivation, which dramatically changes ocular dominance columns, clearly alters both the levels and patterns of neural activity between the two eyes. However, to specifically test the role of correlated activity in driving the competitive postnatal rearrangement of cortical connections, it is necessary to create a situation in which activity levels in each eye remain the same but the correlations between the two eyes are altered. This circumstance can be created in experimental animals by cutting one of the extraocular muscles in one eye. As already mentioned, this condition, in which the two eyes can no longer be aligned, is called strabismus. The major consequence of strabismus is that corresponding points on the two retinas are no longer stimulated by objects in the same location in visual space at the same time. As a result, differences in the visually evoked patterns of activity between the two eyes are far greater than normal. Unlike monocular deprivation, however, the overall amount of activity in each eye remains roughly the same; only the correlation of activity arising from corresponding retinal points is changed. Early in development, inputs from the two eyes converge on single postsynaptic cells. The two sets of presynaptic inputs, however, have different patterns of electrical activity (represented by the short vertical bars). In the example here, the three left eye inputs are better able to activate the postsynaptic cell; as a result, their activity is highly correlated with the postsynaptic cell's activity. According to Hebb's postulate, these synapses are therefore strengthened. The inputs from the right eye carry a different pattern of activity that is less well correlated with the majority of the activity elicited in the postsynaptic cell. These synapses gradually weaken and are eventually eliminated (right-hand side of The effects of strabismus in experimental animals provide an illustration of the basic validity of Hebb's postulate. Recall that misalignment of the two eyes can, depending on the details of the situation, lead to suppression of the input from one and eventual loss of the related cortical connections. In other instances, however, input from the two eyes is retained. The anatomical pattern of ocular dominance columns in layer IV of cats in which input from both eyes remains (but is asynchronous) is sharper than normal, implying that the uncoordinated patterns of activity have actually accentuated the normal separation of cortical inputs from the two eyes. In addition, the ocular asynchrony prevents the binocular convergence that normally occurs in cells above and below layer IV: ocular dominance histograms from such animals show that most cells in all layers are driven exclusively by one eye or the other Even before visual experience exerts these effects, innate mechanisms have ensured that the basic outlines of a functional system are present. These intrinsic mechanisms establish the general circuitry required for vision, but allow modifications to accommodate the individual requirements that occur with changes in head size or eye alignment. Normal visual experience evidently validates the initial wiring, preserving, augmenting, or adjusting the normal arrangement. In the case of abnormal experience, such as monocular deprivation, the mechanisms that allow these adjustments result in more dramatic anatomical (and ultimately behavioral) changes, such as those that occur in amblyopia. The eventual decline of this capacity to remodel cortical (and subcortical) connections is presumably the cellular basis of critical periods in a variety of neural systems, including the development of language and other higher brain functions. By the same token, these differences in  A further question for understanding how experience changes neural circuits during critical periods is how patterns of activity are transduced to modify connections and to make these changes permanent. Clearly, the steps that initiate these processes must rely on signals generated by the synaptic activity associated with sensory experience or motor performance-the basic neural processes by which experience is represented. Neurotransmitters and a number of other signaling molecules, including neurotrophic factors, are obvious candidates for initiating changes that occur with correlated or repeated activity. Indeed, mice that lack genes for a number of neurotransmitters or receptors exhibit changes in experience-dependent visual cortical plasticity. These signals-neurotransmitters and other secreted molecules like neurotrophins-are all thought to ultimately influence levels of intracellular Ca 2+ , particularly in postsynaptic cells Although the neural basis of critical periods has been most thoroughly studied in the mammalian visual system, similar phenomena exist in a number of sensory systems, including the auditory, somatic sensory and olfactory systems. In the auditory system, experiments on the role of auditory experience and neural activity in owls (who use auditory information to localize prey) indicate that neural circuits for auditory localization are similarly shaped by experience. Thus, deafening an owl or altering neural activity during early postnatal development compromises the bird's ability to localize sounds and can alter the neural circuits that mediate this capacity. The development of song in many species of birds provides another auditory example, as described in Chapter 12. In the somatic sensory system, cortical maps can be changed by experience during a critical period of postnatal development. In mice or rats, for instance, the anatomical patterns of "whisker barrels" in the somatic sensory cortex (see Chapter 8) can be altered by abnormal sensory experience during a narrow window in early postnatal life. And, as outlined in Chapter 14, behavioral studies in the olfactory system indicate that exposure to maternal odors for a limited period can alter the ability to respond to such odorants, a change that can persist throughout life. Clearly, the phenomenon of critical periods is general in development of sensory perceptual abilities and motor skills.An individual animal's history of interaction with the environment-its "experience"-helps to shape neural circuitry and thus determines subsequent behavior. In some cases, experience functions primarily as a switch to activate innate behaviors. More often, however, experience during a specific time in early life (referred to as a "critical period") helps shape the adult behavioral repertoire. Critical periods influence behaviors as diverse as maternal bonding and the acquisition of language. Although it is possible to define the behavioral consequences of critical periods for these complex  The capacity of the nervous system to change-generally referred to as neural plasticity-is obvious during the development of neural circuits. However, the adult brain must also possess substantial plasticity in order to learn new skills, establish new memories, and respond to injury throughout life. Although the mechanisms responsible for ongoing changes in the adult brain are not completely understood, altered neural function in maturity appears to rely primarily on carefully regulated changes in the strength of existing synapses. Experiments carried out in a variety of animals, ranging from sea slugs to primates, have shown that synaptic strength can be altered over periods that range from milliseconds to months. The molecular mechanisms underlying these changes are post-translational modifications of proteins and, in the case of longer-lasting effects, changes in gene expression. To some extent, changes in synaptic circuitry can also occur by localized formation of new axon terminals and dendritic processes. More extensive changes occur when the adult nervous system is damaged by trauma or disease, although regeneration of connections in the brain and spinal cord is sharply limited. Modest optimism regarding this unfortunate clinical situation is warranted by the observation that new neurons can be generated throughout life in a limited number of brain regions, suggesting that new cells can be integrated into existing circuits.An obvious obstacle to exploring change in the brains of humans and other mammals is the enormous number of neurons and the complexity of synaptic connections. As a consequence, it is difficult to unambiguously attribute a behavioral modification to changes in the properties of specific neurons or synapses. One way to circumvent this dilemma is to examine plasticity in far simpler nervous systems. The assumption in this strategy is that plasticity is so fundamental that its essential cellular and molecular underpinnings are likely to be conserved in the nervous systems of very different organisms.One of the most successful examples of this approach has been that of Eric Kandel and his colleagues at Columbia University using the marine mollusk Aplysia californica The small number of neurons in the Aplysia nervous system makes it possible to define the neural circuits involved in gill withdrawal and to monitor the activity of individual neurons in these circuits. Although hundreds of neurons are ultimately involved in producing this simple behavior, the activities of only a few different types of neurons can account for gill withdrawal and its plasticity during habituation and sensitization. These critical neurons include mechanosensory neurons that innervate the siphon, motor neurons that innervate muscles in the gill, and interneurons that receive inputs from a variety of sensory neurons Synaptic activity in this circuit is modified during habituation and sensitization. During habituation, transmission at the glutamatergic synapse between the sensory and motor neurons is decreased The same serotonin-induced enhancement of glutamate release that mediates short-term sensitization is also thought to underlie long-term sensitization. However, during long-term sensitization this circuitry is affected for up to several weeks. The prolonged duration of this form of plasticity is evidently due to changes in gene expression and thus protein synthesis ( These studies of Aplysia, and related work on other invertebrates such as the fruit fly (Box A), have led to several generalizations about the neural mechanisms underlying plasticity in the adult nervous system that presumably extend to mammals and other vertebrates. First, behavioral plasticity can clearly arise from plastic changes in the efficacy of synaptic transmission. Second, these changes in synaptic function can be either short-term effects that rely on post-translational modification of existing synaptic proteins, or long-term changes that require changes in gene expression, new protein synthesis, and perhaps even growth of new synapses (or the elimination of existing ones). The following sections explore the evidence for these generalizations in neuronal circuits and synapses of the mature mammalian nervous system. Long-term sensitization is due to changes in gene expression, causing expression of proteins that change PKA activity and lead to changes in synapse growth. 