Copyright Wiley.10 Changes in neurons of the rat supraoptic nucleus during lactation. Left: Before birth, the relevant neurons and their dendrites are isolated from each other by astrocytic processes (blue). Right: During nursing of the young, the astrocytic processes withdraw, and neurons and their dendrites show close apposition (arrow pairs) that allows electrical synapses to form between adjacent neurons (see Chapter 5). (From Modney and Hatton, 1990.)    Differences in female and male behaviors ranging from copulation to cognition are linked to differences in brain structure. Although the neural basis for these sexual dimorphisms is much clearer in experimental animals, the evidence for sex-related differences in the human brain has grown rapidly in recent years. The region of the brain in which the most clear-cut structural dimorphisms occur is the anterior hypothalamus, which governs reproductive behavior. In rats and monkeys, the nuclei in this region play a role not only in the mechanics of sex, but also in desire, parenting, and sexual orientation. In the rodent, sexual dimorphisms develop primarily as a result of hormonal action on neurons during early development. On the strength of this knowledge about sexual development in experimental animals, neurobiological explanations for a variety of human sexual behaviors have been proposed. Such models remain controversial because the sexual dimorphisms of the human brain and their functional significance are neither fully established nor well understood. In addition, only a few such studies have been replicated. Nevertheless, it seems likely that a deeper understanding of how the dynamic interplay between behavior, genetics, hormones, and environment influence the brain throughout life will eventually explain the fascinating continuum of human sexuality.  One of the most intriguing of the brain's complex functions is the ability to store information provided by experience and to retrieve much of it at will. Without this ability, many of the cognitive functions discussed in the preceding chapters could not occur. Learning is the name given to the process by which new information is acquired by the nervous system and is observable through changes in behavior. Memory refers to the encoding, storage, and retrieval of learned information. Equally fascinating (and important) is the normal ability to forget information. Pathological forgetfulness, or amnesia, has been especially instructive about the neurological underpinnings of memory; amnesia is defined as the inability to learn new information or to retrieve information that has already been acquired. The importance of memory in daily life has made understanding these several phenomena one of the major challenges of modern neuroscience, a challenge that has only begun to be met. The mechanisms of plasticity that provide plausible cellular and molecular bases for some aspects of information storage have been considered in Chapters 22 through 24. The present chapter summarizes the broader organization of human memory, surveys the major clinical manifestations of memory disorders, and considers the implications of these disorders for ultimately understanding human memory in more detailed terms.Humans have at least two qualitatively different systems of information storage, which are generally referred to as declarative memory and nondeclarative memory Figure 30.1 The major qualitative categories of human memory. Declarative memory includes those memories that can be brought to consciousness and expressed as remembered events, images, sounds, and so on. Nondeclarative, or procedural, memory includes motor skills, cognitive skills, simple classical conditioning, priming effects, and other information that is acquired and retrieved unconsciously.While it makes good sense to divide human learning and memory into categories based upon the accessibility of stored information to conscious awareness, this distinction becomes problematic when considering learning and memory processes in animals. From an evolutionary point of view, it is unlikely that declarative memory arose de novo in humans with the development of language. Although some researchers continue to argue for different classifications in humans and other animals, recent studies suggest that similar memory processes operate in all mammals and that these memory functions are subserved by homologous neural circuitry. In other mammals, declarative memory typically refers to the storage of information which could, in principle, be declared through language (e.g., "the cheese is in the box in the corner") and that is dependent on the integrity of the medial temporal lobe and its associated structures (discussed later in the chapter). Nondeclarative memory in other animals, as in humans, can be thought of as referring to the learning and storage of sensory associations and motor skills that are not dependent on the medial temporal portions of the brain.In addition to the types of memory defined by the nature of what is remembered, memory can also be categorized according to the time over which it is effective. Although the details are still debated by both psychologists and neurobiologists, three temporal classes of memory are generally accepted Working memory, the second temporal category, is the ability to hold information in mind for seconds to minutes once the present moment has Memor y 735 Box AA category of information storage not usually considered in standard accounts is memories that arise from the experience of the species over the eons, established by natural selection acting on the cellular and molecular mechanisms of neural development. Such stored information does not depend on postnatal experience, but on what a given species has typically encountered in its environment. These "memories" are no less consequential than those acquired by individual experience and are likely to have much underlying biology in common with the memories established during an individual's lifetime. (After all, phylogenetic and ontogenetic memories are based on neuronal connectivity.)Information about the experience of the species, as expressed by endogenous or "instinctive" behavior, can be quite sophisticated, as is apparent in examples collected by ethologists in a wide range of animals, including primates. The most thoroughly studied instances of such behaviors are those occurring in young birds. Hatchlings arrive in the world with an elaborate set of innate behaviors. First is the complex behavior that allows the young bird to emerge from the egg. Having hatched, a variety of additional behaviors indicate how much of its early life is dependent on inherited information. Hatchlings of precocial species "know" how to preen, peck, gape their beaks, and carry out a variety of other complex acts immediately. In some species, hatchlings automatically crouch down in the nest when a hawk passes overhead but are oblivious to the overflight of an innocuous bird. Konrad Lorenz and Niko Tinbergen used handheld silhouettes to explore this phenomenon in naïve herring gulls, as illustrated in the figure shown here. "It soon became obvious," wrote Tinbergen, "that … the reaction was mainly one to shape. When the model had a short neck so that the head protruded only a little in front of the line of the wings, it released alarm, independent of the exact shape of the dummy." Evidently, the memory of what the shadow of a predator looks like is built into the nervous system of this species. Examples in primates include the innate fear that newborn monkeys have of snakes and looming objects.Despite the relatively scant attention paid to this aspect of memory, it is probably the most important component of the stored information in the brain that determines whether or not an individual survives long enough to reproduce. passed. An everyday example of working memory is searching for a lost object; working memory allows the hunt to proceed efficiently, avoiding places already inspected. A conventional way of testing the integrity of working memory at the bedside is to present a string of randomly ordered digits, which the patient is then asked to repeat; surprisingly, the normal "digit span" is only 7-9 numbers. The third temporal category is long-term memory and entails the retention of information in a more permanent form of storage for days, weeks, or even a lifetime. There is general agreement that the so-called engram-the physical embodiment of the long-term memory in neuronal machinerydepends on long-term changes in the efficacy of transmission of the relevant synaptic connections, and/or the actual growth and reordering of such connections. As discussed in Chapter 24, there is good reason to think that both these varieties of synaptic change occur.Evidence for a continual transfer of information from working memory to long-term memory, or consolidation Despite the prevalence of such transfer, the information stored in this process is not particularly reliable. Consider, for instance, the list of words in The normal human capacity for remembering relatively meaningless information is surprisingly limited (as noted, a string of about 7-9 numbers or other arbitrary items). This capacity, however, can be increased dramatically. For example, a college student who for some months spent an hour each day practicing the task of remembering randomly presented numbers was able to recall a string of up to about 80 digits A parallel example of a prodigious quantitative memory is the mathematician Alexander Aitken. After an undistinguished career in elementary school, the 13-year-old Aitken was greatly taken with the manipulation of numbers. For the next four years he undertook, as a personal challenge, to master mental calculation. He began by memorizing the value of π to 1000 places, and could soon do calculations in his head with such facility that he became a local celebrity. When asked for the squares of three-digit numbers, he was able to give these almost instantly. The square roots for each were produced to five significant digits in 2-3 seconds; the squares of four-digit numbers allegedly took him about 5 seconds. Aitken went on to become a professor of mathematics at Edinburgh and was eventually elected a Fellow of the Royal Society for his contributions to numerical mathematics, statistics, and matrix algebra. At the age of 30 or so, he began to lose his enthusiasm for "mental yoga," as he called his penchant. In part, his waning enthusiasm stemmed from the realization that the advent of calculators was making his prowess obsolete (it was then 1930). He also discovered that the last 180 digits of π that he had memorized as a boy were wrong; he had taken the values from the published work of another mental calculator, who erred in an era when there was no way to check the correct value. In fact, Aitken's feat has long since been superseded. In 1981, an Indian mnemonist memorized the value of π to 31,811 places, only to have a Japanese mnemonist increase this record to 40,000 places a few years later! Toscanini's and Aitken's mental processes in these feats were not rote learning, but a result of the fascination that aficionados bring to their special interests (Box B). Although few can boast the mnemonic prowess of such individuals, the human ability to remember the things that deeply interest us-whether baseball statistics, soap opera plots, or the details of brain structure-is amazing.Some years ago, a poll showed that 84% of psychologists agreed with the statement "everything we learn is permanently stored in the mind, although sometimes particular details are not accessible." The 16% who thought otherwise should get the higher marks. Common sense indicates that, were it not for forgetting, our brains would be impossibly burdened with the welter of useless information that is briefly encoded in our immediate memory "buffer." In fact, the human brain is very good at forgetting. In addition to the unreliable performance on tests such as the example in The ability to forget unimportant information may be as critical for normal life as retaining information that is significant. One sort of evidence for this presumption is rare individuals who have difficulty with the normal erasure of information. Perhaps the best-known case is a subject studied over several decades by the Russian psychologist A. R. Luria, who referred to the Memor y 739A fascinating developmental anomaly of human memory is seen in rare individuals who until recently were referred to as idiots savants; the current literature tends to use the less pejorative phrase savant syndrome. Savants are people who, for a variety of poorly understood reasons (typically brain damage in the perinatal period), are severely restricted in most mental activities but extraordinarily competent and mnemonically capacious in one particular domain. The grossly disproportionate skill compared to the rest of their limited mental life can be striking. Indeed, these individualswhose special talent may be in calculation, history, art, language, or music-are usually diagnosed as severely retarded.Many examples could be cited, but a summary of one such case suffices to make the point. The individual whose history is summarized here was given the fictitious name "Christopher" in a detailed study carried out by psychologists Neil Smith and Ianthi-Maria Tsimpli. Christopher was discovered to be severely brain damaged at just a few weeks of age (perhaps as the result of rubella during his mother's pregnancy, or anoxia during birth; the record is uncertain in this respect). He had been institutionalized since childhood because he was unable to care for himself, could not find his way around, had poor handeye coordination, and a variety of other deficiencies. Tests on standard IQ scales were low, consistent with his general inability to cope with daily life. Scores on the Wechsler Scale were, on different occasions, 42, 67, and 52.Despite his severe mental incapacitation, Christopher took an intense interest in books from the age of about three, particularly those providing factual information and lists (e.g., telephone directories and dictionaries). At about six or seven he began to read technical papers that his sister sometimes brought home from work, and he showed a surprising proficiency in foreign languages. His special talent in the acquisition and use of language (an area in which savants are often especially limited) grew rapidly. As an early teenager, Christopher could translate from-and communicate in-a variety of languages in which his skills were described as ranging from rudimentary to fluent; these included Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, modern Greek, Hindi, Italian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, and Welsh. This extraordinary level of linguistic accomplishment is all the more remarkable since he had no formal training in language even at the elementary school level, and could not play tic-tac-toe or checkers because he was unable to grasp the rules needed to make moves in these games.The neurobiological basis for such extraordinary individuals is not understood. It is fair to say, however, that savants are unlikely to have an ability in their areas of expertise that exceeds the competency of normally intelligent individuals who focus passionately on a particular subject (several examples are given in the text). Presumably, the savant's intense interest in a particular cognitive domain is due to one or more brain regions that continue to work reasonably well. Whether because of social feedback or self-satisfaction, savants clearly spend a great deal of their mental time and energy practicing the skill they can exercise more or less normally. The result is that the relevant associations they make become especially rich, as Christopher's case demonstrates. 740 Chapter Thirty subject simply as "S." Luria's description of an early encounter gives some idea why S, then a newspaper reporter, was so interesting:I gave S a series of words, then numbers, then letters, reading them to him slowly or presenting them in written form. He read or listened attentively and then repeated the material exactly as it had been presented. I increased the number of elements in each series, giving him as many as thirty, fifty, or even seventy words or numbers, but this too, presented no problem for him. He did not need to commit any of the material to memory; if I gave him a series of words or numbers, which I read slowly and distinctly, he would listen attentively, sometimes ask me to stop and enunciate a word more clearly, or, if in doubt whether he had heard a word correctly, would ask me to repeat it. Usually during an experiment he would close his eyes or stare into space, fixing his gaze on one point; when the experiment was over, he would ask that we pause while he went over the material in his mind to see if he had retained it. Thereupon, without another moment's pause, he would reproduce the series that had been read to him.A. R. Luria (1987), The Mind of a Mnemonist, pp. 9-10 S's phenomenal memory, however, did not always serve him well. He had difficulty ridding his mind of the trivial information that he tended to focus on, sometimes to the point of incapacitation. As Luria put it:Thus, trying to understand a passage, to grasp the information it contains (which other people accomplish by singling out what is most important) The deterioration of long-term memories was evaluated in this example by a multiple-choice test in which the subjects were asked to recognize the names of television programs that had been broadcast for only one season during the past 15 years. Forgetting of stored information that is no longer used evidently occurs gradually and progressively over the years (chance performance = 25%). (A after Rubin and Kontis, 1983; B after Squire, 1989.)    became a tortuous procedure for S, a struggle against images that kept rising to the surface in his mind. Images, then, proved an obstacle as well as an aid to learning in that they prevented S from concentrating on what was essential. Moreover, since these images tended to jam together, producing still more images, he was carried so far adrift that he was forced to go back and rethink the entire passage. Consequently, a simple passage-a phrase, for that matter-would turn out to be a Sisyphean task. Ibid., p. 113Although forgetting is a normal and apparently essential mental process, it can also be pathological, a condition called amnesia. Some of the causes of memory loss are listed in Three extraordinary clinical cases of amnesia have been especially revealing about the brain systems responsible for the short-term storage and consolidation of declarative information and are now familiar to neurologists and psychologists as patients H.M., N.A., and R.B. (Box C). Taken together, these cases provide dramatic evidence of the importance of midline diencephalic and medial temporal lobe structures-the hippocampus, in particular-in establishing new declarative memories The devastating deficiency is (or was, in the case of R.B.) the inability to establish new memories. Retrograde amnesia-the loss of memory for events preceding an injury or illness-is more typical of the generalized On September 1, 1953, surgeons performed a bilateral medial temporal lobe resection in which the amygdala, uncus, hippocampal gyrus, and anterior twothirds of the hippocampus were removed. At the time, it was unclear that bilateral surgery of this kind would cause a profound memory defect. Severe amnesia was evident, however, upon H.M.'s recovery from the operation, and his life was changed radically.The first formal psychological exam of H.M. was conducted nearly 2 years after the operation, at which time a profound memory defect was still obvious. Just before the examination, for instance, H.M. had been talking to the psychologist; yet he had no recollection of this experience a few minutes later, denying that anyone had spoken to him. He gave the date as March 1953 and seemed oblivious to the fact that he had undergone an operation, or that he had become incapacitated as a result. Nonetheless, his score on the WechslerBellevue Intelligence Scale was 112, a value not significantly different from his preoperative IQ. Various psychological tests failed to reveal any deficiencies in perception, abstract thinking, or reasoning; he seemed highly motivated and, in the context of casual conversation, normal. Importantly, he also performed well on tests of the ability to learn new skills, such as mirror writing or puzzle solving (that is, his ability to form procedural memories was intact). Moreover, his early memories were easily recalled, showing that the structures removed during H.M.'s operation are not a permanent repository for such information. On the Wechsler Memory Scale (a specific test of declarative memory), however, he performed very poorly, and he could not recall a preceding test-set once he had turned his attention to another part of the exam. These deficits, along with his obvious inability to recall events in his daily life, all indicate a profound loss of short-term declarative memory function. During the subsequent decades, H.M. has been studied extensively, primarily by Brenda Milner and her colleagues at the Montreal Neurological Institute. His memory deficiency has continued unabated, and, according to Milner, he has little idea who she is in spite of their acquaintance for nearly 50 years. Sadly, he has gradually come to appreciate his predicament. "Every day is alone," H.M. reports, "whatever enjoyment I've had and whatever sorrow I've had."The Case of N.A. N.A. was born in 1938 and grew up with his mother and stepfather, attending public schools in California. After a year of junior college, he joined the Air Force. In October of 1959 he was assigned to the Azores as a radar technician and remained there until December 1960, when a bizarre accident made him a celebrated neurological case. N.A. was assembling a model airplane in his barracks room while, unbeknownst to him, his roommate was practicing thrusts and parries with a miniature fencing foil behind N.A.'s chair. N.A. turned suddenly and was stabbed through the right nostril. The foil penetrated the cribriform plate (the structure through which the olfactory nerve enters the brain) and took an upward course into the left forebrain. N.A. lost consciousness within a few minutes (presumably because of bleeding in the region of brain injury) and was taken to a hospital. There he exhibited a rightsided weakness and paralysis of the right eye muscles innervated by the third cranial nerve. Exploratory surgery was undertaken and the dural tear repaired. Gradually he recovered and was sent home to California. After some months, his only general neurological deficits were some weakness of upward gaze and mild double vision. He retained, however, a severe anterograde amnesia for declarative memories. MRI studies first carried out in 1986 showed extensive damage to the thalamus and the medial temporal lobe, mostly on the right side; the mammillary bodies also appeared to be missing bilaterally. The exact extent of his lesion, however, is not known, as N.A. remains alive and well. N.A.'s memory from the time of his injury over 40 years ago to the present has remained impaired and, like H.M., he fails badly on formal tests of new learning ability. His IQ is 124, and he shows no defects in language skills, perception, or other measures of intelligence. He also learns new procedural skills quite normally. His amnesia is not as dense as that of H.M. and is more verbal than spatial. He can, for example, draw accurate diagrams of material presented to him earlier. Nonetheless, he loses track of his possessions, forgets what he has done, and tends to forgetwho has come to visit him. He has only vague impressions of political, social, and sporting events that have occurred since his injury. Watching television is difficult because he tends to forget the storyline during commercials. On the other hand, his memory for events prior to 1960 is extremely good; indeed, his lifestyle tends to reflect the 1950s.At the age of 52, R.B. suffered an ischemic episode during cardiac bypass surgery. Following recovery from anesthesia, a profound amnesic disorder was apparent. As in the cases of H.M. and N.A., his IQ was normal (111), and he showed no evidence of cognitive defects other than memory impairment. R.B. was tested extensively for the next five years, and, while his amnesia was not as severe as that of H.M. or N.A., he consistently failed the standard tests of the ability to establish new declarative memories. When R.B. died in 1983 of congestive heart failure, a detailed examination of his brain was carried out. The only significant finding was bilateral lesions of the hippocampus-specifically, cell loss in the CA1 region that extended the full rostral-caudal length of the hippocampus on both sides. The amygdala, thalamus, and mammillary bodies, as well as the structures of the basal forebrain, were normal. R.B.'s case is particularly important because it suggests that hippocampal lesions alone can result in profound anterograde amnesia for declarative memory.  , 1997.)    Chapter Thirty lesions associated with head trauma and neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease (Box D). Although a degree of retrograde amnesia can occur with the more focal lesions that cause anterograde amnesia, the long-term storage of memories is presumably distributed throughout the brain (see the next section). Thus, the hippocampus and related diencephalic structures indicated in Other causes of amnesia have also provided some insight into the parts of the brain relevant to various aspects of memory (see Studies of animals with lesions of the medial temporal lobe have largely corroborated these findings with human patients. For example, one test of the presumed equivalent of declarative memory formation in animals involves placing rats into a pool filled with opaque water, thus concealing a submerged platform; note that the pool is surrounded by prominent visual landmarks Revealing though they have been, clinical studies of amnesic patients have provided relatively little insight into the long-term storage of declarative information in the brain (other than to indicate quite clearly that such information is not stored in the midline diencephalic and medial temporal lobe structures that are affected in anterograde amnesia). Nonetheless, a good deal of evidence implies that the cerebral cortex is the major long-term repository for many aspects of declarative memory.One line of evidence comes from observations of patients undergoing electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Individuals with severe depression are often treated by the passage of enough electrical current through the brain to cause the equivalent of a full-blown seizure (this procedure is done under anesthesia, in well-controlled circumstances). This remarkably useful treatment was discovered because depression in epileptics was perceived to remit after a spontaneous seizure (see Box C in Chapter 24). However, ECT often causes both anterograde and retrograde amnesia. Patients typically do not remember the treatment itself or the events of the preceding days, and even their recall of events of the previous 1-3 years can be affected. Animal studies (rats tested for maze learning, for example) have confirmed the amnesic consequences of ECT. The memory loss usually clears over a period of weeks to months. However, to mitigate this side effect (which may be the result of excitotoxicity; see Box B in Chapter 6), ECT is often delivered to only one hemisphere at a time. The nature of amnesia following ECT supports the conclusion that long-term declarative memories are widely stored in the cerebral cortex, since this is the part of the brain predominantly affected by this therapy.A second line of evidence comes from patients with damage to association cortex outside the medial temporal lobe. Since different cortical regions have different cognitive functions (see Chapters 25 and 26), it is not surprising that these sites store information that reflects the cognitive function of that part of the brain. For example, the lexicon that links speech sounds and their symbolic significance is located in the association cortex of the superior temporal lobe, and damage to this area typically results in an inability to link words and meanings (Wernicke's aphasia; see Chapter 26). Presumably, the widespread connections of the hippocampus to the language areas serve to consolidate declarative information in these and other language-related cortical sites A third sort of evidence supporting the hypothesis that declarative memories are stored in cortical areas specialized for processing particular types of information comes from neuroimaging of human subjects recalling vivid memories. In one such study, subjects first examined words paired with either pictures or sounds. Their brains were then scanned while they were asked to recall whether each test word was associated with either a picture or a sound. Functional images based on these scans showed that the cortical areas activated when subjects viewed pictures or heard sounds were reactivated when these percepts were vividly recalled. In fact, this sort of reactivation can be quite specific. Thus, different classes of visual images-such as faces, houses, or chairs-tend to reactivate the same small regions of the visual association cortex that were activated when the objects were actually perceived These neuroimaging studies reinforce the conclusion that declarative memories are stored widely in specialized areas of the cerebral cortex.Retrieving such memories appears to involve the medial temporal lobe, as well as regions of the frontal cortex. Frontal cortical areas located on the dorsolateral and anterolateral aspect of the brain, in particular, are activated when normal subjects attempt to retrieve declarative information from longterm memory. Moreover, patients with damage to these areas often fail to accurately recall the details of a memory and sometimes resort to confabulation to fill in the missing information. Finally, whereas the ability of patients such as H.M., N.A., and R.B. to remember facts and events from the period of their lives preceding their lesions clearly demonstrates that the medial temporal lobe is not necessary for retrieving declarative information held in long-term memory, other studies have suggested that these structures may be important for recalling declarative memories during the early stages of consolidation and storage in the cerebral cortex.Lateral viewWidespread projections from association neocortex converge on the hippocampal region. The output of the hippocampus is ultimately directed back to these same neocortical areas.Figure 30.8 Connections between the hippocampus and possible declarative memory storage sites. The rhesus monkey brain is shown because these connections are much better documented in non-human primates than in humans. Projections from numerous cortical areas converge on the hippocampus and the related structures known to be involved in human memory; most of these sites also send projections to the same cortical areas. Medial and lateral views are shown, the latter rotated 180°for clarity. (After Van Hoesen, 1982.)    748 Chapter ThirtyH.M., N.A., and R.B. had no difficulty establishing or recalling nondeclarative memories, indicating that this information is laid down by using an anatomical substrate different from that used in declarative memory formation. Nondeclarative memory apparently involves the basal ganglia, prefrontal cortex, amygdala, sensory association cortex, and cerebellum, but not the medial temporal lobe or midline diencephalon. In support of this interpretation, perceptual priming (the influence of previously studied information on subsequent performance, unavailable to conscious recall) depends critically on the integrity of sensory association cortex. For example, lesions of the visual association cortex produce profound impairments in visual priming but leave declarative memory formation intact. Likewise, simple sensory-motor conditioning, such as learning to blink following a tone that predicts a puff of air directed at the eye, relies on the normal activation of neural circuits in the cerebellum. Ischemic damage to the cerebellum following infarcts of the superior cerebellar artery or the posterior inferior cerebellar artery cause profound deficits in classical eyeblink conditioning without interfering with the ability to lay down new declarative memories. Evidence from such doubledissociations endorses the idea that independent brain systems govern the formation and storage of declarative and nondeclarative memories.A brain system that appears to be especially important for complex motor learning involves the signaling loops that connect the basal ganglia and prefrontal cortex (see Chapter 17). Damage to either structure profoundly interferes with the ability to learn new motor skills. Thus, patients with Huntington's disease, which causes atrophy of the caudate and putamen (see The dissociation of memory systems supporting declarative and nondeclarative memory suggests the scheme for long-term information storage diagrammed in Although it is all too obvious that our outward appearance changes with age, we tend to imagine that the brain is much more resistant to the ravages of time. Unfortunately, the evidence suggests that this optimistic view is not justified. From early adulthood onward, the average weight of the normal human brain, as determined at autopsy, steadily decreases Dementia is a syndrome characterized by failure of recent memory and other intellectual functions that is usually insidious in onset but steadily progresses. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common dementia, accounting for 60-80% of cases in the elderly. It afflicts 5-10% of the population over the age of 65, and as much as 45% of the population over 85. The earliest sign is typically an impairment of recent memory function and attention, followed by failure of language skills, visual-spatial orientation, abstract thinking, and judgment. Inevitably, alterations of personality accompany these defects. The tentative diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is based on these characteristic clinical features, and can only be confirmed by the distinctive cellular pathology evident on postmortem examination of the brain. The histopathology consists of three principal features (illustrated in the figure): (1) collections of intraneuronal cytoskeletal filaments called neurofibrillary tangles; (2) extracellular deposits of an abnormal protein in a matrix called amyloid in so-called senile plaques; and (3) a diffuse loss of neurons. These changes are most apparent in neocortex, limbic structures (hippocampus, amygdala, and their associated cortices), and selected brainstem nuclei (especially the basal forebrain nuclei).Although the vast majority of AD cases arise sporadically, the disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern in a small fraction (less than 1%) of patients. Identification of the mutant gene in a few families with an earlyonset autosomal dominant form of the disease has provided considerable insight into the kinds of processes that go awry in Alzheimer's.Investigators suspected that the mutant gene responsible for familial AD might reside on chromosome 21, primarily because similar clinical and neuropathologic features often occur in individuals with Down's syndrome (a syndrome typically caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21), but with a much earlier onset (at about age 30 in most cases). The prominence of amyloid deposits in AD further suggested that a mutation of a gene encoding amyloid precursor protein is somehow involved. The gene for amyloid precursor protein (APP) was cloned by D. Goldgaber and colleagues, and found to reside on chromosome 21. This discovery eventually led to the identification of mutations of the APP gene in almost 20 families with the early-onset autosomal dominant form of AD. It should be noted, however, that only a few of the early-onset families, and none of the late-onset families, exhibited these particular mutations. The mutant genes underlying two additional autosomal dominant forms of AD have been subsequently identified (presenilin 1 and presenilin 2). Thus, mutation of any one of several genes appears to be sufficient to cause a heritable form of AD.The most common form of Alzheimer's occurs late in life, and although the relatives of affected individuals are at a greater risk, the disease is clearly not inherited in any simple sense. The central role of APP in the families with Memor y 751 the early-onset form of the disease nonetheless suggested that APP might be linked to the chain of events culminating in the "spontaneous" forms of Alzheimer's disease. In particular, biochemists Warren Strittmatter and Guy Salvesen theorized that pathologic deposition of proteins complexed with a derivative of APP might be responsible. To test this idea, they immobilized a recombinant form of the APP derivative on nitrocellulose paper and searched for proteins in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Alzheimer's disease that bound with high affinity. One of the proteins they detected was apolipoprotein E (ApoE), a molecule that normally chaperones cholesterol through the bloodstream.This discovery was especially provocative in light of a discovery made by Margaret Pericak-Vance, Allen Roses, and their colleagues at Duke University Medical Center, who found that affected members of some families with the lateonset form of the inherited disease exhibited an association with genetic markers on chromosome 19. This finding was of particular interest because a gene encoding an isoform of apolipoprotein E (the e4 allele) is located in the same region of chromosome 19 implicated by the family studies. As a result, they began to explore the association of the different alleles of apolipoprotein E with affected members in families with a late-onset but inherited form of Alzheimer's disease.There are three major alleles of apolipoprotein E, e2, e3, and e4. The frequency of allele e3 in the general population is 0.78, and the frequency of allele e4 is 0.14. The frequency of the ε4 allele in late-onset familial AD patients, however, is 0.52-almost 4 times higher than the general population. Thus, the inheritance of the e4 allele is a risk factor for lateonset AD. In fact, people homozygous for e4 are about 8 times more likely to develop AD compared to individuals homozygous for ε3. Among individuals in late-onset Alzheimer's families with no copies of e4, only 20% develop AD by age 75 compared to 90% of individuals with two copies of e4. An increased association of the e4 allele has also been shown in the sporadic form of AD, an especially important discovery because this category constitutes by far the most common form of the disease.It is not known whether the ε4 allele of ApoE itself is responsible for the increased risk, or whether it is linked to another gene on chromosome 19 that is the real culprit. The fact that ApoE binds avidly to amyloid plaques in AD brains favors the idea that the e4 allele of ApoE itself is the problem. However, in contrast to the mutations of APP or presenilin 1 and presenilin 2 that cause familial forms of AD, inheriting the e4 form of ApoE is not sufficient to cause AD; rather, inheriting this gene simply increases the risk of developing AD. Moreover, some of the individuals with early-onset forms of familial AD do not have the e4 allele. Thus, a variety of related molecular anomalies appear to underlie AD.A possible common denominator of AD at the cellular level is the "amyloid cascade" hypothesis. A prominent constituent of the amyloid plaques is an abnormal cleavage product of APP called amyloid-β peptide (or β-A4). The cascade hypothesis proposes that accumulation of β-A4 is critical to the pathogenesis of AD. Others, however, argue that extracellular deposition of β-A4 may not be a key event in the pathogenesis of AD because the density of the β-A4 plaques correlates only poorly with severity of the dementia (the degree of dementia being much better correlated with the density of neurofibrillary tangles). Moreover, a transgenic mouse model of AD based on a presenilin 1 mutation exhibits neurodegeneration without amyloid plaque formation.Clearly, AD has a complex pathology and probably reflects a variety of related molecular and cellular abnormalities. It is unlikely that this important problem will be understood without a great deal more research, much hyperbole in the lay press notwithstanding.  These several observations accord with the difficulty older people have in making associations (e.g., remembering names or the details of recent experiences) and with declining scores on tests of memory as a function of age. The normal loss of some memory function with age means that there is a large gray zone between individuals undergoing normal aging and patients suffering from age-related dementias such as Alzheimer's disease (see Box D).Just as regular exercise slows the deterioration of the neuromuscular system with age, age-related neurodegeneration and associated cognitive decline may be slowed in elderly individuals who make a special effort to continue using the full range of human memory abilities (i.e, both declarative and nondeclarative memory tasks). Although cognitive decline with age is ultimately inevitable, neuroimaging studies suggest that high-performing older adults may to some degree offset declines in processing efficacy through compensatory activation of cortical tissue that is less fully used during remembering in poorly performing older adults Human memory entails a number of biological strategies and anatomical substrates. Primary among these are a system for memories that can be expressed by means of language and can be made available to the conscious mind (declarative memory), and a separate system that concerns skills and associations that are essentially prelinguistic, operating at a largely unconscious level (nondeclarative or procedural memory). Based on evidence from amnesic patients and knowledge about normal patterns of neural connections in the human brain, the hippocampus and associated midline diencephalic and medial temporal lobe structures are critically important in laying down new declarative memories, although not in storing them (a process that occurs primarily in the association cortices). In contrast, nondeclarative memories for motor and other unconscious skills depends on the integrity of the premotor cortex, basal ganglia, and cerebellum, and is not affected by lesions that impair the declarative memory system. The common denominator of these categories of stored information is generally thought to be alterations in the strength and number of the synaptic connections in the cerebral cortices that mediate associations between stimuli and the behavioral responses to them..10 Changes in neurons of the rat supraoptic nucleus during lactation. Left: Before birth, the relevant neurons and their dendrites are isolated from each other by astrocytic processes (blue). Right: During nursing of the young, the astrocytic processes withdraw, and neurons and their dendrites show close apposition (arrow pairs) that allows electrical synapses to form between adjacent neurons (see Chapter 5). Differences in female and male behaviors ranging from copulation to cognition are linked to differences in brain structure. Although the neural basis for these sexual dimorphisms is much clearer in experimental animals, the evidence for sex-related differences in the human brain has grown rapidly in recent years. The region of the brain in which the most clear-cut structural dimorphisms occur is the anterior hypothalamus, which governs reproductive behavior. In rats and monkeys, the nuclei in this region play a role not only in the mechanics of sex, but also in desire, parenting, and sexual orientation. In the rodent, sexual dimorphisms develop primarily as a result of hormonal action on neurons during early development. On the strength of this knowledge about sexual development in experimental animals, neurobiological explanations for a variety of human sexual behaviors have been proposed. Such models remain controversial because the sexual dimorphisms of the human brain and their functional significance are neither fully established nor well understood. In addition, only a few such studies have been replicated. Nevertheless, it seems likely that a deeper understanding of how the dynamic interplay between behavior, genetics, hormones, and environment influence the brain throughout life will eventually explain the fascinating continuum of human sexuality.One of the most intriguing of the brain's complex functions is the ability to store information provided by experience and to retrieve much of it at will. Without this ability, many of the cognitive functions discussed in the preceding chapters could not occur. Learning is the name given to the process by which new information is acquired by the nervous system and is observable through changes in behavior. Memory refers to the encoding, storage, and retrieval of learned information. Equally fascinating (and important) is the normal ability to forget information. Pathological forgetfulness, or amnesia, has been especially instructive about the neurological underpinnings of memory; amnesia is defined as the inability to learn new information or to retrieve information that has already been acquired. The importance of memory in daily life has made understanding these several phenomena one of the major challenges of modern neuroscience, a challenge that has only begun to be met. The mechanisms of plasticity that provide plausible cellular and molecular bases for some aspects of information storage have been considered in Chapters 22 through 24. The present chapter summarizes the broader organization of human memory, surveys the major clinical manifestations of memory disorders, and considers the implications of these disorders for ultimately understanding human memory in more detailed terms.Humans have at least two qualitatively different systems of information storage, which are generally referred to as declarative memory and nondeclarative memory Figure 30.1 The major qualitative categories of human memory. Declarative memory includes those memories that can be brought to consciousness and expressed as remembered events, images, sounds, and so on. Nondeclarative, or procedural, memory includes motor skills, cognitive skills, simple classical conditioning, priming effects, and other information that is acquired and retrieved unconsciously.While it makes good sense to divide human learning and memory into categories based upon the accessibility of stored information to conscious awareness, this distinction becomes problematic when considering learning and memory processes in animals. From an evolutionary point of view, it is unlikely that declarative memory arose de novo in humans with the development of language. Although some researchers continue to argue for different classifications in humans and other animals, recent studies suggest that similar memory processes operate in all mammals and that these memory functions are subserved by homologous neural circuitry. In other mammals, declarative memory typically refers to the storage of information which could, in principle, be declared through language (e.g., "the cheese is in the box in the corner") and that is dependent on the integrity of the medial temporal lobe and its associated structures (discussed later in the chapter). Nondeclarative memory in other animals, as in humans, can be thought of as referring to the learning and storage of sensory associations and motor skills that are not dependent on the medial temporal portions of the brain.In addition to the types of memory defined by the nature of what is remembered, memory can also be categorized according to the time over which it is effective. Although the details are still debated by both psychologists and neurobiologists, three temporal classes of memory are generally accepted Working memory, the second temporal category, is the ability to hold information in mind for seconds to minutes once the present moment hasA category of information storage not usually considered in standard accounts is memories that arise from the experience of the species over the eons, established by natural selection acting on the cellular and molecular mechanisms of neural development. Such stored information does not depend on postnatal experience, but on what a given species has typically encountered in its environment. These "memories" are no less consequential than those acquired by individual experience and are likely to have much underlying biology in common with the memories established during an individual's lifetime. (After all, phylogenetic and ontogenetic memories are based on neuronal connectivity.)Information about the experience of the species, as expressed by endogenous or "instinctive" behavior, can be quite sophisticated, as is apparent in examples collected by ethologists in a wide range of animals, including primates. The most thoroughly studied instances of such behaviors are those occurring in young birds. Hatchlings arrive in the world with an elaborate set of innate behaviors. First is the complex behavior that allows the young bird to emerge from the egg. Having hatched, a variety of additional behaviors indicate how much of its early life is dependent on inherited information. Hatchlings of precocial species "know" how to preen, peck, gape their beaks, and carry out a variety of other complex acts immediately. In some species, hatchlings automatically crouch down in the nest when a hawk passes overhead but are oblivious to the overflight of an innocuous bird. Konrad Lorenz and Niko Tinbergen used handheld silhouettes to explore this phenomenon in naïve herring gulls, as illustrated in the figure shown here. "It soon became obvious," wrote Tinbergen, "that … the reaction was mainly one to shape. When the model had a short neck so that the head protruded only a little in front of the line of the wings, it released alarm, independent of the exact shape of the dummy." Evidently, the memory of what the shadow of a predator looks like is built into the nervous system of this species. Examples in primates include the innate fear that newborn monkeys have of snakes and looming objects.Despite the relatively scant attention paid to this aspect of memory, it is probably the most important component of the stored information in the brain that determines whether or not an individual survives long enough to reproduce.  Evidence for a continual transfer of information from working memory to long-term memory, or consolidation Despite the prevalence of such transfer, the information stored in this process is not particularly reliable. Consider, for instance, the list of words in The normal human capacity for remembering relatively meaningless information is surprisingly limited (as noted, a string of about 7-9 numbers or other arbitrary items). This capacity, however, can be increased dramatically. For example, a college student who for some months spent an hour each day practicing the task of remembering randomly presented numbers was able to recall a string of up to about 80 digits A parallel example of a prodigious quantitative memory is the mathematician Alexander Aitken. After an undistinguished career in elementary school, the 13-year-old Aitken was greatly taken with the manipulation of numbers. For the next four years he undertook, as a personal challenge, to master mental calculation. He began by memorizing the value of π to 1000 places, and could soon do calculations in his head with such facility that he became a local celebrity. When asked for the squares of three-digit numbers, he was able to give these almost instantly. The square roots for each were produced to five significant digits in 2-3 seconds; the squares of four-digit numbers allegedly took him about 5 seconds. Aitken went on to become a professor of mathematics at Edinburgh and was eventually elected a Fellow of the Royal Society for his contributions to numerical mathematics, statistics, and matrix algebra. At the age of 30 or so, he began to lose his enthusiasm for "mental yoga," as he called his penchant. In part, his waning enthusiasm stemmed from the realization that the advent of calculators was making his prowess obsolete (it was then 1930). He also discovered that the last 180 digits of π that he had memorized as a boy were wrong; he had taken the values from the published work of another mental calculator, who erred in an era when there was no way to check the correct value. In fact, Aitken's feat has long since been superseded. In 1981, an Indian mnemonist memorized the value of π to 31,811 places, only to have a Japanese mnemonist increase this record to 40,000 places a few years later! Toscanini's and Aitken's mental processes in these feats were not rote learning, but a result of the fascination that aficionados bring to their special interests (Box B). Although few can boast the mnemonic prowess of such individuals, the human ability to remember the things that deeply interest us-whether baseball statistics, soap opera plots, or the details of brain structure-is amazing.Some years ago, a poll showed that 84% of psychologists agreed with the statement "everything we learn is permanently stored in the mind, although sometimes particular details are not accessible." The 16% who thought otherwise should get the higher marks. Common sense indicates that, were it not for forgetting, our brains would be impossibly burdened with the welter of useless information that is briefly encoded in our immediate memory "buffer." In fact, the human brain is very good at forgetting. In addition to the unreliable performance on tests such as the example in The ability to forget unimportant information may be as critical for normal life as retaining information that is significant. One sort of evidence for this presumption is rare individuals who have difficulty with the normal erasure of information. Perhaps the best-known case is a subject studied over several decades by the Russian psychologist A. R. Luria, who referred to theA fascinating developmental anomaly of human memory is seen in rare individuals who until recently were referred to as idiots savants; the current literature tends to use the less pejorative phrase savant syndrome. Savants are people who, for a variety of poorly understood reasons (typically brain damage in the perinatal period), are severely restricted in most mental activities but extraordinarily competent and mnemonically capacious in one particular domain. The grossly disproportionate skill compared to the rest of their limited mental life can be striking. Indeed, these individualswhose special talent may be in calculation, history, art, language, or music-are usually diagnosed as severely retarded.Many examples could be cited, but a summary of one such case suffices to make the point. The individual whose history is summarized here was given the fictitious name "Christopher" in a detailed study carried out by psychologists Neil Smith and Ianthi-Maria Tsimpli. Christopher was discovered to be severely brain damaged at just a few weeks of age (perhaps as the result of rubella during his mother's pregnancy, or anoxia during birth; the record is uncertain in this respect). He had been institutionalized since childhood because he was unable to care for himself, could not find his way around, had poor handeye coordination, and a variety of other deficiencies. Tests on standard IQ scales were low, consistent with his general inability to cope with daily life. Scores on the Wechsler Scale were, on different occasions, 42, 67, and 52.Despite his severe mental incapacitation, Christopher took an intense interest in books from the age of about three, particularly those providing factual information and lists (e.g., telephone directories and dictionaries). At about six or seven he began to read technical papers that his sister sometimes brought home from work, and he showed a surprising proficiency in foreign languages. His special talent in the acquisition and use of language (an area in which savants are often especially limited) grew rapidly. As an early teenager, Christopher could translate from-and communicate in-a variety of languages in which his skills were described as ranging from rudimentary to fluent; these included Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, modern Greek, Hindi, Italian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, and Welsh. This extraordinary level of linguistic accomplishment is all the more remarkable since he had no formal training in language even at the elementary school level, and could not play tic-tac-toe or checkers because he was unable to grasp the rules needed to make moves in these games.The neurobiological basis for such extraordinary individuals is not understood. It is fair to say, however, that savants are unlikely to have an ability in their areas of expertise that exceeds the competency of normally intelligent individuals who focus passionately on a particular subject (several examples are given in the text). Presumably, the savant's intense interest in a particular cognitive domain is due to one or more brain regions that continue to work reasonably well. Whether because of social feedback or self-satisfaction, savants clearly spend a great deal of their mental time and energy practicing the skill they can exercise more or less normally. The result is that the relevant associations they make become especially rich, as Christopher's case demonstrates. subject simply as "S." Luria's description of an early encounter gives some idea why S, then a newspaper reporter, was so interesting:I gave S a series of words, then numbers, then letters, reading them to him slowly or presenting them in written form. He read or listened attentively and then repeated the material exactly as it had been presented. I increased the number of elements in each series, giving him as many as thirty, fifty, or even seventy words or numbers, but this too, presented no problem for him. He did not need to commit any of the material to memory; if I gave him a series of words or numbers, which I read slowly and distinctly, he would listen attentively, sometimes ask me to stop and enunciate a word more clearly, or, if in doubt whether he had heard a word correctly, would ask me to repeat it. Usually during an experiment he would close his eyes or stare into space, fixing his gaze on one point; when the experiment was over, he would ask that we pause while he went over the material in his mind to see if he had retained it. Thereupon, without another moment's pause, he would reproduce the series that had been read to him.A. R. Thus, trying to understand a passage, to grasp the information it contains (which other people accomplish by singling out what is most important) Despite innumerable exposures to this familiar design, few people are able to pick out (a) as the authentic version. Clearly, repeated information is not necessarily retained. (B) The deterioration of long-term memories was evaluated in this example by a multiple-choice test in which the subjects were asked to recognize the names of television programs that had been broadcast for only one season during the past 15 years. Forgetting of stored information that is no longer used evidently occurs gradually and progressively over the years (chance performance = 25%). (A after Although forgetting is a normal and apparently essential mental process, it can also be pathological, a condition called amnesia. Some of the causes of memory loss are listed in Three extraordinary clinical cases of amnesia have been especially revealing about the brain systems responsible for the short-term storage and consolidation of declarative information and are now familiar to neurologists and psychologists as patients H.M., N.A., and R.B. (Box C). Taken together, these cases provide dramatic evidence of the importance of midline diencephalic and medial temporal lobe structures-the hippocampus, in particular-in establishing new declarative memories The devastating deficiency is (or was, in the case of R.B.) the inability to establish new memories. Retrograde amnesia-the loss of memory for events preceding an injury or illness-is more typical of the generalized H.M. had suffered minor seizures since age 10 and major seizures since age 16. At the age of 27, he underwent surgery to correct his increasingly debilitating epilepsy. A high school graduate, H.M. had been working as a technician in a small electrical business until shortly before the time of his operation. His attacks involved generalized convulsions with tongue biting, incontinence, and loss of consciousness (all typical of grand mal seizures). Despite a variety of medications, the seizures remained uncontrolled and increased in severity. A few weeks before his surgery, H.M. became unable to work and had to quit his job.On September 1, 1953, surgeons performed a bilateral medial temporal lobe resection in which the amygdala, uncus, hippocampal gyrus, and anterior twothirds of the hippocampus were removed. At the time, it was unclear that bilateral surgery of this kind would cause a profound memory defect. Severe amnesia was evident, however, upon H.M.'s recovery from the operation, and his life was changed radically.The first formal psychological exam of H.M. was conducted nearly 2 years after the operation, at which time a profound memory defect was still obvious. Just before the examination, for instance, H.M. had been talking to the psychologist; yet he had no recollection of this experience a few minutes later, denying that anyone had spoken to him. He gave the date as March 1953 and seemed oblivious to the fact that he had undergone an operation, or that he had become incapacitated as a result. Nonetheless, his score on the WechslerBellevue Intelligence Scale was 112, a value not significantly different from his preoperative IQ. Various psychological tests failed to reveal any deficiencies in perception, abstract thinking, or reasoning; he seemed highly motivated and, in the context of casual conversation, normal. Importantly, he also performed well on tests of the ability to learn new skills, such as mirror writing or puzzle solving (that is, his ability to form procedural memories was intact). Moreover, his early memories were easily recalled, showing that the structures removed during H.M.'s operation are not a permanent repository for such information. On the Wechsler Memory Scale (a specific test of declarative memory), however, he performed very poorly, and he could not recall a preceding test-set once he had turned his attention to another part of the exam. These deficits, along with his obvious inability to recall events in his daily life, all indicate a profound loss of short-term declarative memory function. During the subsequent decades, H.M. has been studied extensively, primarily by Brenda Milner and her colleagues at the Montreal Neurological Institute. His memory deficiency has continued unabated, and, according to Milner, he has little idea who she is in spite of their acquaintance for nearly 50 years. Sadly, he has gradually come to appreciate his predicament. "Every day is alone," H.M. reports, "whatever enjoyment I've had and whatever sorrow I've had."The Case of N.A. N.A. was born in 1938 and grew up with his mother and stepfather, attending public schools in California. After a year of junior college, he joined the Air Force. In October of 1959 he was assigned to the Azores as a radar technician and remained there until December 1960, when a bizarre accident made him a celebrated neurological case. N.A. was assembling a model airplane in his barracks room while, unbeknownst to him, his roommate was practicing thrusts and parries with a miniature fencing foil behind N.A.'s chair. N.A. turned suddenly and was stabbed through the right nostril. The foil penetrated the cribriform plate (the structure through which the olfactory nerve enters the brain) and took an upward course into the left forebrain. N.A. lost consciousness within a few minutes (presumably because of bleeding in the region of brain injury) and was taken to a hospital. There he exhibited a rightsided weakness and paralysis of the right eye muscles innervated by the third cranial nerve. Exploratory surgery was undertaken and the dural tear repaired. Gradually he recovered and was sent home to California. After some months, his only general neurological deficits were some weakness of upward gaze and mild double vision. He retained, however, a severe anterograde amnesia for declarative memories. MRI studies first carried out in 1986 showed extensive damage to the thalamus and the medial temporal lobe, mostly on the right side; the mammillary bodies also appeared to be missing bilaterally. The exact extent of his lesion, however, is not known, as N.A. remains alive and well. N.A.'s memory from the time of his injury over 40 years ago to the present has remained impaired and, like H.M., he fails badly on formal tests of new learning ability. His IQ is 124, and he shows no defects in language skills, perception, or other measures of intelligence. He also learns new procedural skills quite normally. His amnesia is not as dense as that of H.M. and is more verbal than spatial. He can, for example, draw accurate diagrams of material presented to him earlier. Nonetheless, he loses track of his possessions, forgets what he has done, and tends to forget who has come to visit him. He has only vague impressions of political, social, and sporting events that have occurred since his injury. Watching television is difficult because he tends to forget the storyline during commercials. On the other hand, his memory for events prior to 1960 is extremely good; indeed, his lifestyle tends to reflect the 1950s.At the age of 52, R.B. suffered an ischemic episode during cardiac bypass surgery. Following recovery from anesthesia, a profound amnesic disorder was apparent. As in the cases of H.M. and N.A., his IQ was normal (111), and he showed no evidence of cognitive defects other than memory impairment. R.B. was tested extensively for the next five years, and, while his amnesia was not as severe as that of H.M. or N.A., he consistently failed the standard tests of the ability to establish new declarative memories. When R.B. died in 1983 of congestive heart failure, a detailed examination of his brain was carried out. The only significant finding was bilateral lesions of the hippocampus-specifically, cell loss in the CA1 region that extended the full rostral-caudal length of the hippocampus on both sides. The amygdala, thalamus, and mammillary bodies, as well as the structures of the basal forebrain, were normal. R.B.'s case is particularly important because it suggests that hippocampal lesions alone can result in profound anterograde amnesia for declarative memory.  Other causes of amnesia have also provided some insight into the parts of the brain relevant to various aspects of memory (see Studies of animals with lesions of the medial temporal lobe have largely corroborated these findings with human patients. For example, one test of the presumed equivalent of declarative memory formation in animals involves placing rats into a pool filled with opaque water, thus concealing a submerged platform; note that the pool is surrounded by prominent visual landmarks Revealing though they have been, clinical studies of amnesic patients have provided relatively little insight into the long-term storage of declarative information in the brain (other than to indicate quite clearly that such information is not stored in the midline diencephalic and medial temporal lobe structures that are affected in anterograde amnesia). Nonetheless, a good deal of evidence implies that the cerebral cortex is the major long-term repository for many aspects of declarative memory.One line of evidence comes from observations of patients undergoing electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Individuals with severe depression are often treated by the passage of enough electrical current through the brain to cause the equivalent of a full-blown seizure (this procedure is done under anesthesia, in well-controlled circumstances). This remarkably useful treatment was discovered because depression in epileptics was perceived to remit after a spontaneous seizure (see Box C in Chapter 24). However, ECT often causes both anterograde and retrograde amnesia. Patients typically do not remember the treatment itself or the events of the preceding days, and even their recall of events of the previous 1-3 years can be affected. Animal studies (rats tested for maze learning, for example) have confirmed the amnesic consequences of ECT. The memory loss usually clears over a period of weeks to months. However, to mitigate this side effect (which may be the result of excitotoxicity; see Box B in Chapter 6), ECT is often delivered to only one hemisphere at a time. The nature of amnesia following ECT supports the conclusion that long-term declarative memories are widely stored in the cerebral cortex, since this is the part of the brain predominantly affected by this therapy.A second line of evidence comes from patients with damage to association cortex outside the medial temporal lobe. Since different cortical regions have different cognitive functions (see Chapters 25 and 26), it is not surprising that these sites store information that reflects the cognitive function of that part of the brain. For example, the lexicon that links speech sounds and their symbolic significance is located in the association cortex of the superior temporal lobe, and damage to this area typically results in an inability to link words and meanings (Wernicke's aphasia; see Chapter 26). Presumably, the widespread connections of the hippocampus to the language areas serve to consolidate declarative information in these and other language-related cortical sites A third sort of evidence supporting the hypothesis that declarative memories are stored in cortical areas specialized for processing particular types of information comes from neuroimaging of human subjects recalling vivid memories. In one such study, subjects first examined words paired with either pictures or sounds. Their brains were then scanned while they were asked to recall whether each test word was associated with either a picture or a sound. Functional images based on these scans showed that the cortical areas activated when subjects viewed pictures or heard sounds were reactivated when these percepts were vividly recalled. In fact, this sort of reactivation can be quite specific. Thus, different classes of visual images-such as faces, houses, or chairs-tend to reactivate the same small regions of the visual association cortex that were activated when the objects were actually perceived These neuroimaging studies reinforce the conclusion that declarative memories are stored widely in specialized areas of the cerebral cortex.Retrieving such memories appears to involve the medial temporal lobe, as well as regions of the frontal cortex. Frontal cortical areas located on the dorsolateral and anterolateral aspect of the brain, in particular, are activated when normal subjects attempt to retrieve declarative information from longterm memory. Moreover, patients with damage to these areas often fail to accurately recall the details of a memory and sometimes resort to confabulation to fill in the missing information. Finally, whereas the ability of patients such as H.M., N.A., and R.B. to remember facts and events from the period of their lives preceding their lesions clearly demonstrates that the medial temporal lobe is not necessary for retrieving declarative information held in long-term memory, other studies have suggested that these structures may be important for recalling declarative memories during the early stages of consolidation and storage in the cerebral cortex.  H.M., N.A., and R.B. had no difficulty establishing or recalling nondeclarative memories, indicating that this information is laid down by using an anatomical substrate different from that used in declarative memory formation. Nondeclarative memory apparently involves the basal ganglia, prefrontal cortex, amygdala, sensory association cortex, and cerebellum, but not the medial temporal lobe or midline diencephalon. In support of this interpretation, perceptual priming (the influence of previously studied information on subsequent performance, unavailable to conscious recall) depends critically on the integrity of sensory association cortex. For example, lesions of the visual association cortex produce profound impairments in visual priming but leave declarative memory formation intact. Likewise, simple sensory-motor conditioning, such as learning to blink following a tone that predicts a puff of air directed at the eye, relies on the normal activation of neural circuits in the cerebellum. Ischemic damage to the cerebellum following infarcts of the superior cerebellar artery or the posterior inferior cerebellar artery cause profound deficits in classical eyeblink conditioning without interfering with the ability to lay down new declarative memories. Evidence from such doubledissociations endorses the idea that independent brain systems govern the formation and storage of declarative and nondeclarative memories.A brain system that appears to be especially important for complex motor learning involves the signaling loops that connect the basal ganglia and prefrontal cortex (see Chapter 17). Damage to either structure profoundly interferes with the ability to learn new motor skills. Thus, patients with Huntington's disease, which causes atrophy of the caudate and putamen (see The dissociation of memory systems supporting declarative and nondeclarative memory suggests the scheme for long-term information storage diagrammed in Although it is all too obvious that our outward appearance changes with age, we tend to imagine that the brain is much more resistant to the ravages of time. Unfortunately, the evidence suggests that this optimistic view is not justified. From early adulthood onward, the average weight of the normal human brain, as determined at autopsy, steadily decreases Dementia is a syndrome characterized by failure of recent memory and other intellectual functions that is usually insidious in onset but steadily progresses. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common dementia, accounting for 60-80% of cases in the elderly. It afflicts 5-10% of the population over the age of 65, and as much as 45% of the population over 85. The earliest sign is typically an impairment of recent memory function and attention, followed by failure of language skills, visual-spatial orientation, abstract thinking, and judgment. Inevitably, alterations of personality accompany these defects. The tentative diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is based on these characteristic clinical features, and can only be confirmed by the distinctive cellular pathology evident on postmortem examination of the brain. The histopathology consists of three principal features (illustrated in the figure): (1) collections of intraneuronal cytoskeletal filaments called neurofibrillary tangles; (2) extracellular deposits of an abnormal protein in a matrix called amyloid in so-called senile plaques; and (3) a diffuse loss of neurons. These changes are most apparent in neocortex, limbic structures (hippocampus, amygdala, and their associated cortices), and selected brainstem nuclei (especially the basal forebrain nuclei).Although the vast majority of AD cases arise sporadically, the disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern in a small fraction (less than 1%) of patients. Identification of the mutant gene in a few families with an earlyonset autosomal dominant form of the disease has provided considerable insight into the kinds of processes that go awry in Alzheimer's.Investigators suspected that the mutant gene responsible for familial AD might reside on chromosome 21, primarily because similar clinical and neuropathologic features often occur in individuals with Down's syndrome (a syndrome typically caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21), but with a much earlier onset (at about age 30 in most cases). The prominence of amyloid deposits in AD further suggested that a mutation of a gene encoding amyloid precursor protein is somehow involved. The gene for amyloid precursor protein (APP) was cloned by D. Goldgaber and colleagues, and found to reside on chromosome 21. This discovery eventually led to the identification of mutations of the APP gene in almost 20 families with the early-onset autosomal dominant form of AD. It should be noted, however, that only a few of the early-onset families, and none of the late-onset families, exhibited these particular mutations. The mutant genes underlying two additional autosomal dominant forms of AD have been subsequently identified (presenilin 1 and presenilin 2). Thus, mutation of any one of several genes appears to be sufficient to cause a heritable form of AD.The most common form of Alzheimer's occurs late in life, and although the relatives of affected individuals are at a greater risk, the disease is clearly not inherited in any simple sense. The central role of APP in the families with the early-onset form of the disease nonetheless suggested that APP might be linked to the chain of events culminating in the "spontaneous" forms of Alzheimer's disease. In particular, biochemists Warren Strittmatter and Guy Salvesen theorized that pathologic deposition of proteins complexed with a derivative of APP might be responsible. To test this idea, they immobilized a recombinant form of the APP derivative on nitrocellulose paper and searched for proteins in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Alzheimer's disease that bound with high affinity. One of the proteins they detected was apolipoprotein E (ApoE), a molecule that normally chaperones cholesterol through the bloodstream.This discovery was especially provocative in light of a discovery made by Margaret Pericak-Vance, Allen Roses, and their colleagues at Duke University Medical Center, who found that affected members of some families with the lateonset form of the inherited disease exhibited an association with genetic markers on chromosome 19. This finding was of particular interest because a gene encoding an isoform of apolipoprotein E (the e4 allele) is located in the same region of chromosome 19 implicated by the family studies. As a result, they began to explore the association of the different alleles of apolipoprotein E with affected members in families with a late-onset but inherited form of Alzheimer's disease.There are three major alleles of apolipoprotein E, e2, e3, and e4. The frequency of allele e3 in the general population is 0.78, and the frequency of allele e4 is 0.14. The frequency of the ε4 allele in late-onset familial AD patients, however, is 0.52-almost 4 times higher than the general population. Thus, the inheritance of the e4 allele is a risk factor for lateonset AD. In fact, people homozygous for e4 are about 8 times more likely to develop AD compared to individuals homozygous for ε3. Among individuals in late-onset Alzheimer's families with no copies of e4, only 20% develop AD by age 75 compared to 90% of individuals with two copies of e4. An increased association of the e4 allele has also been shown in the sporadic form of AD, an especially important discovery because this category constitutes by far the most common form of the disease.It is not known whether the ε4 allele of ApoE itself is responsible for the increased risk, or whether it is linked to another gene on chromosome 19 that is the real culprit. The fact that ApoE binds avidly to amyloid plaques in AD brains favors the idea that the e4 allele of ApoE itself is the problem. However, in contrast to the mutations of APP or presenilin 1 and presenilin 2 that cause familial forms of AD, inheriting the e4 form of ApoE is not sufficient to cause AD; rather, inheriting this gene simply increases the risk of developing AD. Moreover, some of the individuals with early-onset forms of familial AD do not have the e4 allele. Thus, a variety of related molecular anomalies appear to underlie AD.A possible common denominator of AD at the cellular level is the "amyloid cascade" hypothesis. A prominent constituent of the amyloid plaques is an abnormal cleavage product of APP called amyloid-β peptide (or β-A4). The cascade hypothesis proposes that accumulation of β-A4 is critical to the pathogenesis of AD. Others, however, argue that extracellular deposition of β-A4 may not be a key event in the pathogenesis of AD because the density of the β-A4 plaques correlates only poorly with severity of the dementia (the degree of dementia being much better correlated with the density of neurofibrillary tangles). Moreover, a transgenic mouse model of AD based on a presenilin 1 mutation exhibits neurodegeneration without amyloid plaque formation.Clearly, AD has a complex pathology and probably reflects a variety of related molecular and cellular abnormalities. It is unlikely that this important problem will be understood without a great deal more research, much hyperbole in the lay press notwithstanding.  humans grow old (consistent with the idea that the networks of connections that represent memories-i.e., the engrams-gradually deteriorate).These several observations accord with the difficulty older people have in making associations (e.g., remembering names or the details of recent experiences) and with declining scores on tests of memory as a function of age. The normal loss of some memory function with age means that there is a large gray zone between individuals undergoing normal aging and patients suffering from age-related dementias such as Alzheimer's disease (see Box D).Just as regular exercise slows the deterioration of the neuromuscular system with age, age-related neurodegeneration and associated cognitive decline may be slowed in elderly individuals who make a special effort to continue using the full range of human memory abilities (i.e, both declarative and nondeclarative memory tasks). Although cognitive decline with age is ultimately inevitable, neuroimaging studies suggest that high-performing older adults may to some degree offset declines in processing efficacy through compensatory activation of cortical tissue that is less fully used during remembering in poorly performing older adults Human memory entails a number of biological strategies and anatomical substrates. Primary among these are a system for memories that can be expressed by means of language and can be made available to the conscious mind (declarative memory), and a separate system that concerns skills and associations that are essentially prelinguistic, operating at a largely unconscious level (nondeclarative or procedural memory). Based on evidence from amnesic patients and knowledge about normal patterns of neural connections in the human brain, the hippocampus and associated midline diencephalic and medial temporal lobe structures are critically important in laying down new declarative memories, although not in storing them (a process that occurs primarily in the association cortices). In contrast, nondeclarative memories for motor and other unconscious skills depends on the integrity of the premotor cortex, basal ganglia, and cerebellum, and is not affected by lesions that impair the declarative memory system. The common denominator of these categories of stored information is generally thought to be alterations in the strength and number of the synaptic connections in the cerebral cortices that mediate associations between stimuli and the behavioral responses to them. The brainstem, comprising the midbrain, pons, and medulla, is continuous rostrally with the diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus) and with the spinal cord caudally. Although the medulla, pons, and midbrain participate in myriad specific functions, the integrated actions of these brainstem components give rise to three fundamental functions. First, the brainstem is the target or source for the cranial nerves that deal with sensory and motor function in the head and neck ( Unlike the spinal cord, which is relatively homogeneous in appearance along its length, the surface appearance of each brainstem subdivision is characterized by unique bumps and bulges formed by the underlying gray matter (nuclei) or white matter (tracts) The pons is caudal to the midbrain and is easily recognized by the mass of decussating fibers on its ventral surface that give this subdivison its name; pons literally means "bridge." The cerebellum is attached to the dorsal aspect of the pons by three large white matter tracts, the superior, middle and inferior cerebellar peduncles. Each of these tracts contains either efferent (superior) or afferent (inferior and middle) axons from or to the cerebellum.There is a series of swellings on the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the medulla that reflect many of the major structures in this part of the brainstem. Laterally, the inferior olivary complex can be seen. Adjacent and The surface features of the midbrain, pons, and medulla can be used as landmarks for locating the source and termination of the majority of cranial nerves in the brainstem. Unlike the spinal nerves, the entry and exit points of the cranial nerves are not regularly arrayed along the length of the brainstem. Two cranial nerves, the olfactory nerve (I) and the optic nerve (II), enter the forebrain directly. The remaining cranial nerves enter and exit at distinct regions of the ventral (and in one case, the dorsal) surface of the midbrain, pons, and medulla ( The rostral-caudal organization of the cranial nerve nuclei (all of which are bilaterally symmetric) reflects the rostrocaudal distribution of head and neck structures (see Understanding the blood supply of the brain and spinal cord is crucial for the practice of medicine, particularly for neurology and neurosurgery. Damage to major blood vessels by trauma or stroke results in combinations of functional defects reflecting local cell death as well as the disruption of axons passing through the region compromised by the vascular damage. Thus, a firm knowledge of the major cerebral blood vessels and the neuroanatomical territories they perfuse facilitates the initial diagnoses of a broad range of brain damage and disease.The entire blood supply of the brain and spinal cord depends on two sets of branches from the dorsal aorta. The vertebral arteries arise from the subclavian arteries, and the internal carotid arteries are branches of the common carotid arteries. The vertebral arteries and the ten medullary arteries that arise from segmental branches of the aorta provide the primary vascularization of the spinal cord. These medullary arteries join to form the anterior and posterior spinal arteries ( Anterior to the spinal cord and brainstem, the internal carotid arteries branch to form two major cerebral arteries, the anterior and middle cerebral arteries. The right and left vertebral arteries come together at the level of the pons on the ventral surface of the brainstem to form the midline basilar artery. The basilar artery joins the blood supply from the internal carotids in an arterial ring at the base of the brain (in the vicinity of the hypothalamus and cerebral peduncles) called the circle of Willis. The posterior cerebral arteries arise at this confluence, as do two small bridging arteries, the anterior and posterior communicating arteries. Conjoining the two major sources of cerebral vascular supply via the circle of Willis presumably improves the chances of any region of the brain continuing to receive blood if one of the major arteries becomes occluded (see Box A).The major branches that arise from the internal carotid artery-the anterior and middle cerebral arteries-form the anterior circulation that supplies the forebrain ( Vascular Supply, the Meninges, and the Ventricular System structures such as the basal ganglia, thalamus, and internal capsule. Particularly prominent are the lenticulostriate arteries that branch from the middle cerebral artery. These arteries supply the basal ganglia and thalamus. The posterior circulation of the brain supplies the posterior cerebral cortex, the midbrain, and the brainstem; it comprises arterial branches arising from the posterior cerebral, basilar, and vertebral arteries. The pattern of arterial distribution is similar for all the subdivisions of the brainstem: midline arteries supply medial structures, lateral arteries supply the lateral brainstem, and dorsal-lateral arteries supply dorsal-lateral brainstem structures and the cerebellum ( The physiological demands served by the blood supply of the brain are particularly significant because neurons are more sensitive to oxygen deprivation than other kinds of cells with lower rates of metabolism. In addition, the brain is at risk from circulating toxins, and is specifically protected in this respect by the blood-brain barrier (see below). As a result of the high metabolic rate of neurons, brain tissue deprived of oxygen and glucose as a result of compromised blood supply is likely to sustain transient or permanent damage. Brief loss of blood supply (referred to as ischemia) can cause cellular changes, which, if not quickly reversed, can lead to cell death. Sustained loss of blood supply leads much more directly to death and degeneration of the deprived cells. Strokes-an anachronistic term that refers to the death or dysfunction of brain tissue due to vascular disease-often follow the occlu- sion of (or hemorrhage from) the brain's arteries (Box A). Historically, studies of the functional consequences of strokes, and their relation to vascular territories in the brain and spinal cord, provided information about the location of various brain functions. The location of the major language functions in the left hemisphere, for instance, was discovered in this way in the latter part of the nineteenth century (see Chapter 26). Now, noninvasive functional imaging techniques based on blood flow (see Box A In Chapter 1) have largely supplanted the correlation of clinical signs and symptoms with the location of tissue damage observed at autopsy.The interface between the walls of capillaries and the surrounding tissue is important throughout the body, as it keeps vascular and extravascular concen-  trations of ions and molecules at appropriate levels in these two compartments. In the brain, this interface is especially significant and has been accorded an alliterative name, "the blood-brain barrier." The special properties of the blood-brain barrier were first observed by the nineteenth-century bacteriologist Paul Ehrlich, who noted that intravenously injected dyes leaked out of capillaries in most regions of the body to stain the surrounding tissues; the brain, however, remained unstained. Ehrlich wrongly concluded that the brain had a low affinity for the dyes; his student, Edwin Goldmann, showed that such dyes do not traverse the specialized walls of brain capillaries.The restriction of large molecules like Ehrlich's dyes (and many smaller molecules) to the vascular space is the result of tight junctions between neighboring capillary endothelial cells in the brain ( Stroke is the most common neurological cause for admission to a hospital, and is the third leading cause of death in the United States (after heart disease and cancer). The term "stroke" refers to the sudden appearance of a limited neurological deficit, such as weakness or paralysis of a limb, or the sudden inability to speak. The onset of the deficit within seconds, minutes, or hours marks the problem a vascular one. Brain function is exquisitely dependent on a continuous supply of oxygen, as evidenced by the onset of unconsciousness within about 10 seconds of blocking its blood supply (by cardiac arrest, for instance). The damage to neurons is at first reversible, but eventually becomes permanent if the blood supply is not promptly restored.Strokes can be subdivided into three main types: thrombotic, embolic, and hemorrhagic. The thrombotic variety is caused by a local reduction of blood flow arising from an atherosclerotic buildup in one of the cerebral blood vessels that eventually occludes it. Alternatively, a reduction of blood flow can arise when an embolus (meaning an object loose in the bloodstream) dislodges from the heart (or from an atherosclerotic plaque in the carotid or vertebral arteries) and travels to a cerebral artery (or arteriole) where it forms a plug. A hemorrhagic stroke occurs when a cerebral blood vessel ruptures, as can occur as a result of hypertension, a congenital aneurysm (bulging of a vessel), or a congenital arterio-venous malformation. The relative frequency of thrombotic, embolic, and hemorrhagic strokes is approximately 50%, 30%, and 20%, respectively.The diagnosis of stroke relies primarily on an accurate history and a competent neurological examination. Indeed, the neurologist C. Miller Fisher, a master of bedside diagnosis, remarked that medical students and residents should learn neurology "stroke by stroke." Understanding the portion of the brain supplied by each of the major arteries (see text) enables an astute clinician to identify the occluded blood vessel.More recently, imaging techniques such as CT scans and MRI (see Box A in Chapter 1) have greatly facilitated the physician's ability to identify and localize small hemorrhages and regions of permanently damaged tissue. Moreover, Doppler ultrasound, magnetic resonance angiography, and imaging of blood vessels by direct infusion of radio-opaque dye can now pinpoint atherosclerotic plaques, aneurysms, and other vascular abnormalities.Several therapeutic approaches to strokes are feasible. Dissolving a thrombotic plug by tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) and other compounds is now standard clinical practice for selected stroke victims. Furthermore, recent understanding of some of the mechanisms by which ischemia injures brain tissue has made pharmacological strategies to minimize neuronal injury after stroke a potentially effective possibility (see Box D in Chapter 6). Hemorrhagic strokes are treated neurosurgically by finding and stopping the bleeding from the defective vessel (when that is technically possible).These approaches can minimize functional loss; however, strokes remain a serious health risk from which there is never full recovery. The inability of the mature brain to replace large populations of damaged or dead neurons, or to repair long axon tracts once they have been compromised, invariably prevents the complete restoration of lost functions.traffic. The structure of tight junctions was first demonstrated in the 1960s by Tom Reese, Morris Karnovsky, and Milton Brightman. Using electron microscopy after the injection of electron-dense intravascular agents such as lanthanum salts, they showed that the close apposition of the endothelial cell membranes prevented such ions from passing (panel B in In addition to tight junctions, astrocytic "end feet" (the terminal regions of astrocytic processes) surround the outside of capillary endothelial cells. The reason for this endothelial-glial allegiance is unclear, but may reflect an influence of astrocytes on the formation and maintenance of the blood-brain barrier.The brain, more than any other organ, must be carefully shielded from abnormal variations in its ionic milieu, as well as from the potentially toxic molecules that find their way into the vascular space by ingestion, infection, or other means. The blood-brain barrier is thus important for protection and homeostasis. It also presents a significant problem for the delivery of drugs to the brain. Large (or lipid-insoluble) molecules can be introduced to the brain, but only by transiently disrupting the blood-brain barrier with hyperosmotic agents like mannitol.The cranial cavity is conventionally divided into three regions called the anterior, middle, and posterior cranial fossae. Surrounding and supporting the brain within this cavity are three protective tissue layers, which also extend down the brainstem and the spinal cord. Together these layers are  The cerebral ventricles are a series of interconnected, fluid-filled spaces that lie in the core of the forebrain and brainstem anencephaly A congenital defect of neural tube closure, in which much of the brain fails to develop. anosmia Loss of the sense of smell. anterior Toward the front; sometimes used as a synonym for rostral, and sometimes as a synonym for ventral. anterior commissure A small midline fiber tract that lies at the anterior end of the corpus callosum; like the callosum, it serves to connect the two hemispheres. anterior hypothalamus Region of the hypothalamus containing nuclei that mediate sexual behaviors; not to be confused with region in rodent called the medial preoptic area, which lies anterior to hypothalamus and also contains nuclei that mediate sexual behavior (most notably the sexually dimorphic nucleus). anterograde A movement or influence acting from the neuronal cell body toward the axonal target. anterolateral pathway (anterolateral system) Ascending sensory pathway in the spinal cord and brainstem that carries information about pain and temperature to the thalamus. antiserum Serum harvested from an animal immunized to an agent of interest. aphasia The inability to comprehend and/or produce language as a result of damage to the language areas of the cerebral cortex (or their white matter interconnections). apoptosis Cell death resulting from a programmed pattern of gene expression; also known as "programmed cell death." aprosodia The inability to infuse language with its normal emotional content. arachnoid mater One of the three coverings of the brain that make up the meninges; lies between the dura mater and the pia mater. areflexia Loss of reflexes. association cortex Defined by exclusion as those neocortical regions that are not involved in primary sensory or motor processing. associativity In the hippocampus, the enhancement of a weakly activated group of synapses when a nearby group is strongly activated. astrocytes One of the three major classes of glial cells found in the central nervous system; important in regulating the ionic milieu of nerve cells and, in some cases, transmitter reuptake. astrotactin A cell surface molecule that causes neurons to adhere to radial glial fibers during neuronal migration. athetosis Slow, writhing movements seen primarily in patients with disorders of the basal ganglia. ATPase pumps Membrane pumps that use the hydrolysis of ATP to translocate ions against their electrochemical gradients. atrophy The physical wasting away of a tissue, typically muscle, in response to disuse or other causes. attention The selection of a particular sensory stimulus or mental process for further analysis.auditory meatus Opening of the external ear canal. auditory space map Topographic representation of sound source location, as occurs in the inferior colliculus. autonomic nervous system The components of the nervous system (peripheral and central) concerned with the regulation of smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands (see also visceral motor system). axon The neuronal process that carries the action potential from the nerve cell body to a target. axoplasmic transport The process by which materials are carried from nerve cell bodies to their terminals (anterograde transport), or from nerve cell terminals to the neuronal cell body (retrograde transport).baroreceptors Sensory receptors in the visceral motor system that respond to changes in blood pressure. basal ganglia A group of nuclei lying deep in the subcortical white matter of the frontal lobes that organize motor behavior. The caudate and putamen and the globus pallidus are the major components of the basal ganglia; the subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra are often included. basal lamina (basement membrane) A thin layer of extracellular matrix material (primarily collagen, laminin, and fibronectin) that surrounds muscle cells and Schwann cells. Also underlies all epithelial sheets. basilar membrane The membrane that forms the floor of the cochlear duct, on which the cochlear hair cells are located. basket cells Inhibitory interneurons in the cerebellar cortex whose cells bodies are located within the Purkinje cell layer and whose axons make basketlike terminal arbors around Purkinje cell bodies. binocular Referring to both eyes. biogenic amines The bioactive amine neurotransmitters; includes the catecholamines (epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine), serotonin, and histamine. bipolar cells Retinal neurons that provide a direct link between photoreceptor terminals and ganglion cell dendrites. bisexuality Sexual attraction to members of both the opposite and the same phenotypic sex. blastomere A cell produced when the egg undergoes cleavage. blastula An early embryo during the stage when the cells are typically arranged to form a hollow sphere. blind spot The region of visual space that falls on the optic disk; due to the lack of photoreceptors in the optic disk, objects that lie completely within the blind spot are not perceived. blood-brain barrier A diffusion barrier between the brain vasculature and the substance of the brain formed by tight junctions between capillary endothelial cells. bouton (synaptic bouton) A swelling specialized for the release of neurotransmitter that occurs along or at the end of an axon. bradykinesia Pathologically slow movement. brain-derived neutrophic factor (BDNF) One member of a family of neutrophic factors, the best-known constituent of which is nerve growth factor. brainstem The portion of the brain that lies between the diencephalon and the spinal cord; comprises the midbrain, pons, and medulla.Broca's aphasia Difficulty producing speech as a result of damage to Broca's area in the left frontal lobe.Broca's area An area in the left frontal lobe specialized for the production of language.CA1 A region of the hippocampus that shows a robust form of long-term potentiation. CA3 A region of the hippocampus containing the neurons that form the Schaffer collaterals. cadherins A family of calcium-dependent cell adhesion molecules found on the surfaces of growth cones and the cells over which they grow. calcarine sulcus The major sulcus on the medial aspect of the occipital lobe; the primary visual cortex lies largely within this sulcus. cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) A protein activated by cyclic AMP that binds to specific regions of DNA, thereby increasing the transcription rates of nearby genes. cAMP response elements (CREs) Specific DNA sequences that bind transcription factors activated by cAMP (see also cAMP response element binding protein). carotid bodies Specialized tissue masses found at the bifurcation of the carotid arteries in humans and other mammals that respond to the chemical composition of the blood (primarily the partial pressure of oxygen and carbon dioxide). catecholamine A term referring to molecules containing a catechol ring and an amino group; examples are the neurotransmitters epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. cauda equina The collection of segmental ventral and dorsal roots that extend from the caudal end of the spinal cord to their exit from the spinal canal. caudal Posterior, or "tailward." caudate nucleus One of the three major components of the basal ganglia (the other two are the globus pallidus and putamen). cell adhesion molecules A family of molecules on cell surfaces that cause them to stick to one another (see also fibronectin and laminin). central nervous system The brain and spinal cord of vertebrates (by analogy, the central nerve cord and ganglia of invertebrates). central pattern generator Oscillatory spinal cord or brainstem circuits responsible for programmed, rhythmic movements such as locomotion. central sulcus A major sulcus on the lateral aspect of the hemispheres that forms the boundary between the frontal and parietal lobes. The anterior bank of the sulcus contains the primary motor cortex; the posterior bank contains the primary sensory cortex. cerebellar ataxia A pathological inability to make coordinated movements associated with lesions to the cerebellum. cerebellar cortex The superficial gray matter of the cerebellum. cerebellar peduncles The three bilateral pairs of axon tracts (inferior, middle, and superior cerebellar peduncles) that carry information to and from the cerebellum. cerebellum Prominent hindbrain structure concerned with motor coordination, posture, and balance. Composed of a three-layered cortex and deep nuclei; attached to the brainstem by the cerebellar peduncles. cerebral aqueduct The portion of the ventricular system that connects the third and fourth ventricles.cerebral cortex The superficial gray matter of the cerebral hemispheres. cerebral peduncles The major fiber bundles that connect the brainstem to the cerebral hemispheres. cerebrocerebellum The part of the cerebellar cortex that receives input from the cerebral cortex via axons from the pontine relay nuclei. cerebrospinal fluid A normally clear and cell-free fluid that fills the ventricular system of the central nervous system; produced by the choroid plexus in the third ventricle. a member of the semaphorin family of signaling molecules. colliculi The two paired hillocks that characterize the dorsal surface of the midbrain; the superior colliculi concern vision, the inferior colliculi audition. competition The struggle among nerve cells, or nerve cell processes, for limited resources essential to survival or growth. concha A component of the external ear. conduction aphasia Difficulty producing speech as a result of damage to the connection between Wernicke's and Broca's language areas. conduction velocity The speed at which an action potential is propagated along an axon. conductive hearing loss Diminished sense of hearing due reduced ability of sounds to be mechanically transmitted to the inner ear. Common causes include occlusion of the ear canal, perforation of the tympanic membrane, and arthritic degeneration of the middle ear ossicles. Contrast with sensorineural hearing loss. cone opsins The three distinct photopigments found in cones; the basis for color vision. cones Photoreceptors specialized for high visual acuity and the perception of color. congenital adrenal hyperplasia Genetic deficiency that leads to overproduction of androgens and a resultant masculinization of external genitalia in genotypic females. conjugate The paired movements of the two eyes in the same direction, as occurs in the vestibulo-ocular reflex (see also vergence movements and vestibulo-ocular reflex). conspecific Fellow member of a species. contralateral On the other side. contralateral neglect syndrome Neurological condition in which the patient does not acknowledge or attend to the left visual hemifield or the left half of the body. The syndrome typically results from lesions of the right parietal cortex. contrast The difference, usually expressed in terms of a percentage in luminance, between two territories in the visual field (can also apply to color when specified as spectral contrast). convergence Innervation of a target cell by axons from more than one neuron. cornea The transparent surface of the eyeball in front of the lens; the major refractive element in the optical pathway. coronal Referring to a plane through the brain that runs parallel to the coronal suture (the mediolateral plane). Synonymous with frontal plane. corpus callosum The large midline fiber bundle that connects the cortices of the two cerebral hemispheres. corpus striatum General term applied to the caudate and putamen; name derives from the striated appearance of these basal ganglia nuclei in sections of fresh material. cortex The superficial mantle of gray matter covering the cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum, where most of the neurons in the brain are located.cortico-cortical connections Connections made between cortical areas in the same hemisphere or betweem the two hemispheres via the cerebral commissures (the corpus callosum and the anterior commissure). corticospinal tract Pathway carrying motor information from the primary and secondary motor cortices to the brain stem and spinal cord. co-transmitters Two or more types of neurotransmitters within a single synapse; may be packaged into separate populations of synaptic vesicles or co-localized within the same synaptic vesicles. cranial nerve ganglia The sensory ganglia associated with the cranial nerves; these correspond to the dorsal root ganglia of the spinal segmental nerves. cranial nerve nuclei Nuclei in the brainstem that contain the neurons related to cranial nerves III-XII. cranial nerves The 12 pairs of nerves arising from the brainstem that carry sensory information toward (and sometimes motor information away from) the central nervous system. CREB see cAMP response element binding protein.crista The hair cell-containing sensory epithelium of the semicircular canals. critical period A restricted developmental period during which the nervous system is particularly sensitive to the effects of experience. cuneate nuclei Sensory relay nuclei that lie in the lower medulla; they contain the second-order sensory neurons that relay mechanosensory information from peripheral receptors in the upper body to the thalamus. cupulae Gelatinous structures in the semicircular canals in which the hair cell bundles are embedded. cytoarchitectonic areas Distinct regions of the neocortical mantle identified by differences in cell size, packing density, and laminar arrangement.decerebrate rigidity Excessive tone in extensor muscles as a result of damage to descending motor pathways at the level of the brainstem. declarative memory Memories available to consciousness that can be expressed by language. decussation A crossing of fiber tracts in the midline. deep cerebellar nuclei The nuclei at the base of the cerebellum that relay information from the cerebellar cortex to the thalamus. delayed response genes Genes that are synthesized de novo after a cell is stimulated; usually refers to transcriptional activator proteins that are synthesized after preexisting transcription factors are first activated by an inducing stimulus. delayed response task A behavioral paradigm used to test cognition and memory. delta waves Slow (<4 Hz) electroencephalographic waves that characterize stage IV (slow-wave) sleep. dendrite A neuronal process arising from the cell body that receives synaptic input. denervation Removal of the innervation to a target. dentate gyrus A region of the hippocampus; so named because it is shaped like a tooth. depolarization The displacement of a cell's membrane potential toward a less negative value. dermatome The area of skin supplied by the sensory axons of a single spinal nerve. ter; contains neurons that process sensory information. dorsal root ganglia (DRG) The segmental sensory ganglia of the spinal cord; contain the first-order neurons of the dorsal column/medial lemniscus and spinothalamic pathways. dorsal roots The bundle of axons that runs from the dorsal root ganglia to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, carrying sensory information from the periphery. dura mater The thick external covering of the brain and spinal cord; one of the three components of the meninges, the other two being the pia mater and arachnoid mater. dynorphins A class of endogenous opioid peptides. dysarthria Difficulty producing speech as a result of damage to the primary motor centers that govern the muscles of articulation; distinguished from aphasia, which results from cortical damage. dysmetria Inaccurate movements due to faulty judgment of distance. Characteristic of cerebellar pathology. dystonia Lack of muscle tone.early inward current The initial electrical current, measured in voltage clamp experiments, that results from the voltagedependent entry of a cation such as Na + or Ca 2+ ; produces the rising phase of the action potential. ectoderm The most superficial of the three embryonic germ layers; gives rise to the nervous system and epidermis. Edinger-Westphal nucleus Midbrain nucleus containing the autonomic neurons that constitute the efferent limb of the pupillary light reflex. efferent An axon that conducts information away from the central nervous system. electrical synapses Synapses that transmit information via the direct flow of electrical current at gap junctions. electrochemical equilibrium The condition in which no net ionic flux occurs across a membrane because ion concentration gradients and opposing transmembrane potentials are in exact balance. electrogenic Capable of generating an electrical current; usually applied to membrane transporters that create electrical currents while translocating ions. embryo The developing organism before birth or hatching. end plate current (EPC) Postsynaptic current produced by neurotransmitter release and binding at the motor end plate. end plate potential (EPP) Depolarization of the membrane potential of skeletal muscle fiber, caused by the action of the transmitter acetylcholine at the neuromuscular synapse. endocrine Referring to the release of signaling molecules whose effects are made widespread by distribution in the general circulation. endocytosis A budding off of vesicles from the plasma membrane, which allows uptake of materials in the extracellular medium. endoderm The innermost of the three embryonic germ layers. endogenous opioids Peptides in the central nervous system that have the same pharmacological effects as morphine and other derivatives of opium. endolymph The potassium-rich fluid filling both the cochlear duct and the membranous labyrinth; bathes the apical end of the hair cells. endorphins One of a group of neuropeptides that are agonists at opioid receptors, virtually all of which contain the sequence Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe. end plate The complex postsynaptic specialization at the site of nerve contact on skeletal muscle fibers. engram The term used to indicate the physical basis of a stored memory. enkephalins A general term for endogenous opioid peptides. ependyma The epithelial lining of the canal of the spinal cord and the ventricles. ependymal cells Epithelial cells that line the ventricular system. epidermis The outermost layer of the skin; derived from the embryonic ectoderm. epigenetic Referring to influences on development that arise from factors other than genetic instructions. epinephrine (adrenaline) Catecholamine hormone and neurotransmitter that binds to α-and β-adrenergic G-proteincoupled receptors. epineurium The connective tissue surrounding axon fascicles of a peripheral nerve. epithelium Any continuous layer of cells that covers a surface or lines a cavity. equilibrium potential The membrane potential at which a given ion is in electrochemical equilibrium. estradiol One of the biologically important C 18 class of steroid hormones capable of inducing estrous in females. eukaryote An organism that contains cells with nuclei. excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) Neurotransmitterinduced postsynaptic potential change that depolarizes the cell, and hence increases the likelihood of initiating a postsynaptic action potential.exocytosis A form of cell secretion resulting from the fusion of the membrane of a storage organelle, such as a synaptic vesicle, with the plasma membrane. explant A piece of tissue maintained in culture medium. external segment A subdivision of the globus pallidus. extracellular matrix A matrix composed of collagen, laminin, and fibronectin that surrounds most cells (see also basal lamina). extrafusal muscle fibers Fibers of skeletal muscles; a term that distinguishes ordinary muscle fibers from the specialized intrafusal fibers associated with muscle spindles.face cells Neurons in the temporal cortex of rhesus monkeys that respond specifically to faces. facilitation The increased transmitter release produced by an action potential that follows closely upon a preceding action potential. family A taxonomic category subordinate to order; comprises genera. fasciculation The aggregation of neuronal processes to form a nerve bundle; also refers to the spontaneous discharge of motor units after muscle denervation. a-fetoprotein A protein that actively sequestors circulating estrogens. fetus The developing mammalian embryo at relatively late stages when the parts of the body are recognizable. fibrillation Spontaneous contractile activity of denervated muscle fibers. fibroblast growth factor (FGF) A peptide growth factor, originally defined by its mitogenic effects on fibroblasts; also acts as an inducer during early brain development. fibronectin A large cell adhesion molecule that binds integrins. filopodium Slender protoplasmic projection, arising from the growth cone of an axon or a dendrite, that explores the local environment. fissure A deep cleft in the brain; distinguished from sulci, which are shallower cortical infoldings. flexion reflex Polysynaptic reflex mediating withdrawal from a painful stimulus. floorplate Region in the ventral portion of the developing spinal cord; important in the guidance and crossing of growing axons. folia The name given to the gyral formations of the cerebellum. forebrain The anterior portion of the brain that includes the cerebral hemispheres (includes the telencephalon and diencephalon). fornix An axon tract, best seen from the medial surface of the divided brain, that interconnects the hypothalamus and hippocampus. fourth ventricle The ventricular space that lies between the pons and the cerebellum. fovea Area of the retina specialized for high acuity in the center of the macula; contains a high density of cones and few rods. foveola Capillary and rod-free zone in the center of the fovea. frontal lobe One of the four lobes of the brain; includes all the cortex that lies anterior to the central sulcus and superior to the lateral fissure.A large family of neurotransmitter or hormone receptors, characterized by seven transmembrane domains; the binding of these receptors by agonists leads to the activation of intracellular G-proteins. G-proteins Term for two large groups of proteins-the heterotrimeric G-proteins and the small-molecule G-proteinsthat can be activated by exchanging bound GDP for GTP. gamma (g) motor neurons Class of spinal motor neurons specifically concerned with the regulation of muscle spindle length; these neurons innervate the intrafusal muscle fibers of the spindle. ganglion (plural, ganglia) Collections of hundreds to thousands of neurons found outside the brain and spinal cord along the course of peripheral nerves. ganglion cell A neuron located in a ganglion. gap junction A specialized intercellular contact formed by channels that directly connect the cytoplasm of two cells. gastrula The early embryo during the period when the three embryonic germ layers are formed; follows the blastula stage. gastrulation The cell movements (invagination and spreading) that transform the embryonic blastula into the gastrula. gender identification Self-perception of one's alignment with the traits associated with being a phenotypic female or male in a given culture. gene A hereditary unit located on the chromosomes; genetic information is carried by linear sequences of nucleotides in DNA that code for corresponding sequences of amino acids. genome The complete set of an animal's genes. genotype The genetic makeup of an individual. genotypic sex Sexual characterization according to the complement of sex chromosomes; XX is a genotypic female, and XY is a genotypic male. genus A taxonomic division that comprises a number of closely related species within a family. germ cell The egg or sperm (or the precursors of these cells). germ layers The three primary layers of the developing embryo from which all adult tissues arise: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. glia (neuroglial cells) The support cells associated with neurons (astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia in the central nervous system; Schwann cells in peripheral nerves; and satellite cells in ganglia). globus pallidus One of the three major nuclei that make up the basal ganglia in the cerebral hemispheres; relays information from the caudate and putamen to the thalamus. glomeruli Characteristic collections of neuropil in the olfactory bulbs; formed by dendrites of mitral cells and terminals of olfactory receptor cells, as well as processes from local interneurons. glutamate-glutamine cycle A metabolic cycle of glutamate release and resynthesis involving both neuronal and glial cells. G olf A G-protein found uniquely in olfactory receptor neurons. Golgi tendon organs Receptors located in muscle tendons that provide mechanosensory information to the central nervous system about muscle tension. gracile nuclei Sensory nuclei in the lower medulla; these second-order sensory neurons relay mechanosensory information from the lower body to the thalamus.gradient A systematic variation of the concentration of a molecule (or some other agent) that influences cell behavior. granule cell layer The layer of the cerebellar cortex where granule cell bodies are found. Also used to refer to cell-rich layers in neocortex and hippocampus. gray matter General term that describes regions of the central nervous system rich in neuronal cell bodies and neuropil; includes the cerebral and cerebellar cortices, the nuclei of the brain, and the central portion of the spinal cord. Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) A protein, originally discovered in a light-emitting jellyfish, that generates green fluorescent light. GFP is widely used as a genetic tag in fluorescence microscopy. It allows observation of specific neurons and some of their components over time in living cells, or even in whole organisms. Especially exciting has been the ability to monitor changes neuronal structure over time. growth cone The specialized end of a growing axon (or dendrite) that generates the motive force for elongation. gyri The ridges of the infolded cerebral cortex (the valleys between these ridges are called sulci).hair cells The sensory cells within the inner ear that transduce mechanical displacement into neural impulses. helicotrema The opening at the apex of the cochlea that joins the scala vestibuli and scala tympani. Hensen's node see primitive pit. heterotrimeric G-proteins A large group of proteins consisting of three subunits (α, β, and γ) that can be activated by exchanging bound GDP with GTP resulting in the liberation of two signaling molecules-αGTP and the βγ-dimer. higher-order neurons Neurons that are relatively remote from peripheral targets. hindbrain see rhombencephalon. hippocampus A cortical structure in the medial portion of the temporal lobe; in humans, concerned with short-term declarative memory, among many other functions. histamine A biogenic amine neurotransmitter derived from the amino acid histidine. homeobox genes A set of master control genes whose expression establishes the early body plan of developing organisms (see also homeotic mutant). homeotic mutant A mutation that transforms one part of the body into another (e.g., insect antennae into legs). Affects homeobox genes. homologous Technically, referring to structures in different species that share the same evolutionary history; more generally, referring to structures or organs that have the same general anatomy and perform the same function. homosexuality Sexual attraction to an individual of the same phenotypic sex. horizontal cells Retinal neurons that mediate lateral interactions between photoreceptor terminals and the dendrites of bipolar cells. horseradish peroxidase A plant enzyme widely used to stain nerve cells (after injection into a neuron, it generates a visible precipitate by one of several histochemical reactions). Huntington's disease An autosomal dominant genetic disorder in which a single gene mutation results in personality changes, progressive loss of the control of voluntary movement, and eventually death. Primary target is the basal ganglia.