nel Given the importance of Na  and K  channels for neuronal excitation, it is not surprising that a number of organisms have evolved channel-specific toxins as mechanisms for self-defense or for capturing prey. A rich collection of natural toxins selectively target the ion channels of neurons and other cells. These toxins are valuable not only for survival, but for studying the function of cellular ion channels. The best-known channel toxin is tetrodotoxin, which is produced by certain puffer fish and other animals.Tetrodotoxin produces a potent and specific obstruction of the Na  channels responsible for action potential generation, thereby paralyzing the animals unfortunate enough to ingest it. Saxitoxin, a chemical homologue of tetrodotoxin produced by dinoflagellates, has a similar action on Na  channels. The potentially lethal effects of eating shellfish that have ingested these "red tide" dinoflagellates are due to the potent neuronal actions of saxitoxin. Scorpions paralyze their prey by injecting a potent mix of peptide toxins that also affect ion channels. Among these are the a-toxins, which slow the inactivation of Na  channels Potassium channels have also been targeted by toxin-producing organisms.Peptide toxins affecting K  channels include dendrotoxin, from wasps apamin, from bees and charybdotoxin, yet another toxin produced by scorpions. All of these toxins block K  channels as their primary action no toxin is known to affect the activation or inactivation of these channels, although such agents may simply be awaiting discovery. -Toxin from the scorpion Leiurus quinquestriatus prolongs Na  currents recorded with the voltage clamp method. Crystallographic studies have also determined the structure of the voltage sensor in another type of bacterial K  channel. Such studies indicate that the sensor is at the interface between proteins and lipid on the cytoplasmic surface of the channel, leading to the suggestion that the sensor is a paddle-like structure that moves through the membrane to gate the opening of the channel pore Several genetic diseases, collectively called channelopathies, result from small but critical alterations in ion channel genes. The best-characterized of these diseases are those that affect skeletal muscle cells. In these disorders, alterations in ion channel proteins produce either myotonia or paralysis. Other disorders arise from ion channel defects in heart, kidney, and the inner ear. Channelopathies associated with ion channels localized in brain are much more difficult to study. Nonetheless, voltage-gated Ca 2 channels have recently been implicated in a range of neurological diseases. These include episodic ataxia, spinocerebellar degeneration, night blindness, and migraine headaches. Familial hemiplegic migraine is characterized by migraine attacks that typically last one to three days. During such episodes, patients experience severe headaches and vomiting. Several mutations in a human Ca 2 channel have been identified in families with FHM, each having different clinical symptoms. For example, a mutation in the pore-forming region of the channel produces hemiplegic migraine with progressive cerebellar ataxia, whereas other mutations cause only the usual FHM symptoms. How these altered Ca 2 channel properties lead to migraine attacks is not known.Episodic ataxia type 2 is a neurological disorder in which affected individuals suffer recurrent attacks of abnormal limb movements and severe ataxia. Genetic mutations in Ca 2 channels, Na  channels, K  channels, and Clchannels that result in diseases. Red regions indicate the sites of these mutations the red circles indicate mutations.  Given the importance of Na  and K  channels for neuronal excitation, it is not surprising that a number of organisms have evolved channel-specific toxins as mechanisms for self-defense or for capturing prey. A rich collection of natural toxins selectively target the ion channels of neurons and other cells. These toxins are valuable not only for survival, but for studying the function of cellular ion channels. The best-known channel toxin is tetrodotoxin, which is produced by certain puffer fish and other animals.Tetrodotoxin produces a potent and specific obstruction of the Na  channels responsible for action potential generation, thereby paralyzing the animals unfortunate enough to ingest it. Saxitoxin, a chemical homologue of tetrodotoxin produced by dinoflagellates, has a similar action on Na  channels. The potentially lethal effects of eating shellfish that have ingested these "red tide" dinoflagellates are due to the potent neuronal actions of saxitoxin. Scorpions paralyze their prey by injecting a potent mix of peptide toxins that also affect ion channels. Among these are the a-toxins, which slow the inactivation of Na  channels Potassium channels have also been targeted by toxin-producing organisms.Peptide toxins affecting K  channels include dendrotoxin, from wasps apamin, from bees and charybdotoxin, yet another toxin produced by scorpions. All of these toxins block K  channels as their primary action no toxin is known to affect the activation or inactivation of these channels, although such agents may simply be awaiting discovery. -Toxin from the scorpion Leiurus quinquestriatus prolongs Na  currents recorded with the voltage clamp method. Crystallographic studies have also determined the structure of the voltage sensor in another type of bacterial K  channel. Such studies indicate that the sensor is at the interface between proteins and lipid on the cytoplasmic surface of the channel, leading to the suggestion that the sensor is a paddle-like structure that moves through the membrane to gate the opening of the channel pore Channelopathies associated with ion channels localized in brain are much more difficult to study. Nonetheless, voltage-gated Ca 2 channels have recently been implicated in a range of neurological diseases. These include episodic ataxia, spinocerebellar degeneration, night blindness, and migraine headaches. Familial hemiplegic migraine is characterized by migraine attacks that typically last one to three days. During such episodes, patients experience severe headaches and vomiting. Several mutations in a human Ca 2 channel have been identified in families with FHM, each having different clinical symptoms. For example, a mutation in the pore-forming region of the channel produces hemiplegic migraine with progressive cerebellar ataxia, whereas other mutations cause only the usual FHM symptoms. How these altered Ca 2 channel properties lead to migraine attacks is not known.Episodic ataxia type 2 is a neurological disorder in which affected individuals suffer recurrent attacks of abnormal limb movements and severe ataxia. In short, ion channels are integral membrane proteins with characteristic features that allow them to assemble into multimolecular aggregates. Collectively, these structures allow channels to conduct ions, sense the transmembrane potential, to inactivate, and to bind to various neurotoxins. A combination of physiological, molecular biological and crystallographic studies has begun to provide a detailed physical picture of K  channels. This work has now provided considerable insight into how ions are conducted from one side of the plasma membrane to the other, how a channel can be selectively permeable to a single type of ion, how they are able to sense changes in membrane voltage, and how they gate the opening of their pores. It is likely that other types of ion channels will be similar in their functional architecture. Finally, this sort of work has illuminated how mutations in ion channel genes can lead to a variety of neurological disorders.nied by vertigo, nausea, and headache. Usually, attacks are precipitated by emotional stress, exercise, or alcohol and last for a few hours. The mutations in EA2 cause Ca 2 channels to be truncated at various sites, which may cause the clinical manifestations of the disease by preventing the normal assembly of Ca 2 channels in the membrane.X-linked congenital stationary night blindness is a recessive retinal disorder that causes night blindness, decreased visual acuity, myopia, nystagmus, and strabismus. Complete CSNB causes retinal rod photoreceptors to be nonfunctional. Incomplete CSNB causes subnormal functioning of both rod and cone photoreceptors. Like EA2, the incomplete type of CSNB is caused by mutations producing truncated Ca 2 channels. Abnormal retinal function may arise from decreased Ca 2 currents and neurotransmitter release from photoreceptors.A defect in brain Na  channels causes generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures that begins in infancy and usually continues through early puberty. This defect has been mapped to two mutations: one on chromosome 2 that encodes an  subunit for a voltage-gated Na  channel, and the other on chromosome 19 that encodes a Na  channel  subunit. These mutations cause a slowing of Na  channel inactivation, which may explain the neuronal hyperexcitability underlying GEFS.Another type of seizure, benign familial neonatal convulsion, is due to K  channel mutations. This disease is characterized by frequent brief seizures commencing within the first week of life and disappearing spontaneously within a few months. The mutation has been mapped to at least two voltage-gated K  channel genes. A reduction in K  current flow through the mutated channels probably accounts for the hyperexcitability associated with this defect. A related disease, episodic ataxia type 1, has been linked to a defect in another type of voltage-gated K  channel. EA1 is characterized by brief episodes of ataxia. Mutant channels inhibit the function of other, non-mutant K  channels and may produce clinical symptoms by impairing action potential repolarization. Mutations in the K  channels of cardiac muscle are responsible for the irregular heartbeat of patients with long Q-T syndrome. Numerous genetic disorders affect the voltage-gated channels of skeletal muscle and are responsible for a host of muscle diseases that either cause muscle weakness or muscle contraction. Up to this point, the discussion of the molecular basis of electrical signaling has taken for granted the fact that nerve cells maintain ion concentration gradients across their surface membranes. However, none of the ions of physiological importance are in electrochemical equilibrium. Because channels produce electrical effects by allowing one or more of these ions to diffuse down their electrochemical gradients, there would be a gradual dissipation of these concentration gradients unless nerve cells could restore ions displaced during the current flow that occurs as a result of both neural signaling and the continual ionic leakage that occurs at rest. The work of generating and maintaining ionic concentration gradients for particular ions is carried out by a group of plasma membrane proteins known as active transporters.Active transporters carry out this task by forming complexes with the ions that they are translocating. The process of ion binding and unbinding for transport typically requires several milliseconds. As a result, ion translocation by active transporters is much slower than ion movement through channels: Recall that ion channels can conduct thousands of ions across a membrane each millisecond. In short, active transporters gradually store energy in the form of ion concentration gradients, whereas the opening of ion channels rapidly dissipates this stored energy during relatively brief electrical signaling events.Several types of active transporter have now been identified Of these various transporters, the best understood is the Na  K  pump. The activity of this pump is estimated to account for 20-40% of the brains energy consumption, indicating its importance for brain function. The Na  pump was first discovered in neurons in the 1950s, when Richard Keynes at Cambridge University used radioactive Na  to demonstrate the energydependent efflux of Na  from squid giant axons. Keynes and his collaborators found that this efflux ceased when the supply of ATP in the axon was interrupted by treatment with metabolic poisons Additional quantitative studies of the movements of Na  and K  indicate that the two ions are not pumped at identical rates: The K  influx is only about two-thirds the Na  efflux. Thus, the pump apparently transports two K  into the cell for every three Na  that are removed Although the electrical current generated by the activity of the Na  K  pump is small, under special circumstances the pump can significantly influence the membrane potential. For instance, prolonged stimulation of  These observations imply that the Na  and K  pump must exhibit several molecular properties: It must bind both Na  and K   it must possess sites that bind ATP and receive a phosphate group from this ATP and it must bind ouabain, the toxin that blocks this pump Ion transporters and channels have complementary functions. The primary purpose of transporters is to generate transmembrane concentration gradients, which are then exploited by ion channels to generate electrical signals. Ion channels are responsible for the voltage-dependent conductances of nerve cell membranes. The channels underlying the action potential are integral membrane proteins that open or close ion-selective pores in response to the membrane potential, allowing specific ions to diffuse across the membrane. The flow of ions through single open channels can be detected as tiny electrical currents, and the synchronous opening of many such channels generates the macroscopic currents that produce action potentials. Molecular studies show that such voltage-gated channels have highly conserved structures that are responsible for features such as ion permeation and voltage sensing, as well as the features that specify ion selectivity and toxin sensitivity. Other types of channels are sensitive to chemical signals, such as neurotransmitters or second messengers, or to heat or membrane deformation. A large number of ion channel genes create channels with a correspondingly wide range of functional characteristics, thus allowing different types of neurons to have a remarkable spectrum of electrical properties. Ion transporter proteins are quite different in both structure and function. The energy needed for ion movement against a concentration gradient is provided either by the hydrolysis of ATP or by the electrochemical gradient of co-transported ions. The Na  K  pump produces and maintains the transmembrane gradients of Na  and K  , while other transporters are responsible for the electrochemical gradients for other physiologically important ions, such as Cl -, Ca 2 , and H  . Together, transporters and channels provide a reasonably comprehensive molecular explanation for the ability of neurons to generate electrical signals. The human brain contains at least 100 billion neurons, each with the ability to influence many other cells. Clearly, sophisticated and highly efficient mechanisms are needed to enable communication among this astronomical number of elements. Such communication is made possible by synapses, the functional contacts between neurons. Two different types of synapse-electrical and chemical-can be distinguished on the basis of their mechanism of transmission. At electrical synapses, current flows through gap junctions, which are specialized membrane channels that connect two cells. In contrast, chemical synapses enable cell-to-cell communication via the secretion of neurotransmitters these chemical agents released by the presynaptic neurons produce secondary current flow in postsynaptic neurons by activating specific receptor molecules. The total number of neurotransmitters is not known, but is well over 100. Virtually all neurotransmitters undergo a similar cycle of use: synthesis and packaging into synaptic vesicles release from the presynaptic cell binding to postsynaptic receptors and, finally, rapid removal andor degradation. The secretion of neurotransmitters is triggered by the influx of Ca 2 through voltage-gated channels, which gives rise to a transient increase in Ca 2 concentration within the presynaptic terminal. The rise in Ca 2 concentration causes synaptic vesicles to fuse with the presynaptic plasma membrane and release their contents into the space between the pre-and postsynaptic cells. Although it is not yet understood exactly how Ca 2 triggers exocytosis, specific proteins on the surface of the synaptic vesicle and elsewhere in the presynaptic terminal mediate this process. Neurotransmitters evoke postsynaptic electrical responses by binding to members of a diverse group of neurotransmitter receptors. There are two major classes of receptors: those in which the receptor molecule is also an ion channel, and those in which the receptor and ion channel are separate molecules. These receptors give rise to electrical signals by transmitter-induced opening or closing of the ion channels. Whether the postsynaptic actions of a particular neurotransmitter are excitatory or inhibitory is determined by the ionic permeability of the ion channel affected by the transmitter, and by the concentration of permeant ions inside and outside the cell.Although there are many kinds of synapses within the human brain, they can be divided into two general classes: electrical synapses and chemical synapses. Although they are a distinct minority, electrical synapses are found in all nervous systems, permitting direct, passive flow of electrical current from one neuron to another.The structure of an electrical synapse is shown schematically in Electrical synapses thus work by allowing ionic current to flow passively through the gap junction pores from one neuron to another. The usual source of this current is the potential difference generated locally by the action potential. This arrangement has a number of interesting consequences. One is that transmission can be bidirectional that is, current can flow in either direction across the gap junction, depending on which member of the coupled pair is invaded by an action potential. Another important feature of the electrical synapse is that transmission is extraordinarily fast: because passive current flow across the gap junction is virtually instantaneous, communication can occur without the delay that is characteristic of chemical synapses. These features are apparent in the operation of the first electrical synapse to be discovered, which resides in the crayfish nervous system. A postsynaptic electrical signal is observed at this synapse within a fraction of a millisecond after the generation of a presynaptic action potential A more general purpose of electrical synapses is to synchronize electrical activity among populations of neurons. For example, the brainstem neurons that generate rhythmic electrical activity underlying breathing are synchronized by electrical synapses, as are populations of interneurons in the cerebral cortex, thalamus, cerebellum, and other brain regions. Electrical transmission between certain hormone-secreting neurons within the mammalian hypothalamus ensures that all cells fire action potentials at about the same time, thus facilitating a burst of hormone secretion into the circulation. The fact that gap junction pores are large enough to allow molecules such as ATP and second messengers to diffuse intercellularly also permits electrical synapses to coordinate the intracellular signaling and metabolism of coupled cells. This property may be particularly important for glial cells, which form large intracellular signaling networks via their gap junctions. The general structure of a chemical synapse is shown schematically in Following exocytosis, transmitters diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to specific receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic neuron. The binding of neurotransmitter to the receptors causes channels in the postsynaptic membrane to open, thus changing the ability of ions to flow into the postsynaptic cells. The resulting neurotransmitter-induced current flow alters the conductance and the membrane potential of the postsynaptic neuron, increasing or decreasing the probability that the neuron will fire an action potential. In this way, information is transmitted from one neuron to another.The notion that electrical information can be transferred from one neuron to the next by means of chemical signaling was the subject of intense debate through the first half of the twentieth century. A key experiment that supported this idea was performed in 1926 by German physiologist Otto Loewi. Acting on an idea that allegedly came to him in the middle of the night, Loewi proved that electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve slows the heartbeat by releasing a chemical signal. He isolated and perfused the hearts of two frogs, monitoring the rates at which they were beating Over the years, a number of formal criteria have emerged that definitively identify a substance as a neurotransmitter. These have led to the identification of more than 100 different neurotransmitters, which can be classified into two broad categories: small-molecule neurotransmitters and neuropeptides. Having more than one transmitter diversifies the physiological repertoire of synapses. Multiple neurotransmitters can produce different types of responses on individual postsynaptic cells. For example, a neuron can be excited by one type of neurotransmitter and inhibited by another type of neurotransmitter. The speed of postsynaptic responses produced by different transmitters also differs, allowing control of electrical signaling over different time scales. In general, small-molecule neurotransmitters mediate rapid synaptic actions, whereas neuropeptides tend to modulate slower, ongoing synaptic functions. Until relatively recently, it was believed that a given neuron produced only a single type of neurotransmitter. It is now clear, however, that many types of neurons synthesize and release two or more different neurotransmitters. When more than one transmitter is present within a nerve terminal, the molecules are called co-transmitters. Because different types of transmitters can be packaged in different populations of synaptic vesicles, co-transmitters need not be released simultaneously. When peptide and small-molecule neurotransmitters act as co-transmitters at the same synapse, they are differentially released according to the pattern of synaptic activity: low-frequency activity often releases only small neurotransmitters, whereas highfrequency activity is required to release neuropeptides from the same presynaptic terminals. As a result, the chemical signaling properties of such synapses change according to the rate of activity.Effective synaptic transmission requires close control of the concentration of neurotransmitters within the synaptic cleft. Neurons have therefore developed a sophisticated ability to regulate the synthesis, packaging, release, and Where the vagus nerve of an isolated frogs heart was stimulated, the heart rate decreased. If the perfusion fluid from the stimulated heart was transferred to a second heart, its rate decreased as well.Three primary criteria have been used to confirm that a molecule acts as a neurotransmitter at a given chemical synapse.1. The substance must be present within the presynaptic neuron. Clearly, a chemical cannot be secreted from a presynaptic neuron unless it is present there. Because elaborate biochemical pathways are required to produce neurotransmitters, showing that the enzymes and precursors required to synthesize the substance are present in presynaptic neurons provides additional evidence that the substance is used as a transmitter. Note, however, that since the transmitters glutamate, glycine, and aspartate are also needed for protein synthesis and other metabolic reactions in all neurons, their presence is not sufficient evidence to establish them as neurotransmitters.2. The substance must be released in response to presynaptic depolarization, and the release must be Ca 2 -dependent.Another essential criterion for identifying a neurotransmitter is to demonstrate that it is released from the presynaptic neuron in response to presynaptic electrical activity, and that this release requires Ca 2 influx into the presynaptic terminal. Meeting this criterion is technically challenging, not only because it may be difficult to selectively stimulate the presynaptic neurons, but also because enzymes and transporters efficiently remove the secreted neurotransmitters.3. Specific receptors for the substance must be present on the postsynaptic cell. A neurotransmitter cannot act on its target unless specific receptors for the transmitter are present in the postsynaptic membrane. One way to demonstrate receptors is to show that application of exogenous transmitter mimics the postsynaptic effect of presynaptic stimulation. A more rigorous demonstration is to show that agonists and antagonists that alter the normal postsynaptic response have the same effect when the substance in question is applied exogenously. High-resolution histological methods can also be used to show that specific receptors are present in the postsynaptic membrane.Fulfilling these criteria establishes unambiguously that a substance is used as a transmitter at a given synapse. Practical difficulties, however, have prevented these standards from being applied at many types of synapses. It is for this reason that so many substances must be referred to as "putative" neurotransmitters. Demonstrating the identity of a neurotransmitter at a synapse requires showing its presence, its release, and the postsynaptic presence of specific receptors.degradation of neurotransmitters to achieve the desired levels of transmitter molecules. The synthesis of small-molecule neurotransmitters occurs locally within presynaptic terminals Much of the evidence leading to the present understanding of chemical synaptic transmission was obtained from experiments examining the release of ACh at neuromuscular junctions. These synapses between spinal motor neurons and skeletal muscle cells are simple, large, and peripherally located, making them particularly amenable to experimental analysis. Such synapses occur at specializations called end plates because of the saucer-like appearance of the site on the muscle fiber where the presynaptic axon elaborates its terminals One of Katzs seminal findings, in studies carried out with Paul Fatt in 1951, was that spontaneous changes in muscle cell membrane potential occur even in the absence of stimulation of the presynaptic motor neuron The relationship between the full-blown end plate potential and MEPPs was clarified by careful analysis of the EPPs. The magnitude of the EPP provides a convenient electrical assay of neurotransmitter secretion from a motor neuron terminal however, measuring it is complicated by the need to prevent muscle contraction from dislodging the microelectrode. The usual means of eliminating muscle contractions is either to lower Ca 2 concentration in the extracellular medium or to partially block the postsynaptic ACh receptors with the drug curare. As expected from the scheme illustrated in The discovery of the quantal release of packets of neurotransmitter immediately raised the question of how such quanta are formed and discharged into the synaptic cleft. At about the time Katz and his colleagues were using physiological methods to discover quantal release of neurotransmitter, electron microscopy revealed, for the first time, the presence of synaptic vesicles in presynaptic terminals. Putting these two discoveries together, Katz and others proposed that synaptic vesicles loaded with transmitter are the source of the quanta. Subsequent biochemical studies confirmed that synaptic vesi-  To prove that quanta are caused by the fusion of individual synaptic vesicles with the plasma membrane, it is necessary to show that each fused vesicle causes a single quantal event to be recorded postsynaptically. This challenge was met in the late 1970s, when John Heuser, Tom Reese, and colleagues correlated measurements of vesicle fusion with the quantal content of EPPs at the neuromuscular junction. In their experiments, the number of vesicles that fused with the presynaptic plasma membrane was measured by electron microscopy in terminals that had been treated with a drug that enhances the number of vesicle fusion events produced by single action potentials The fusion of synaptic vesicles causes new membrane to be added to the plasma membrane of the presynaptic terminal, but the addition is not permanent. Although a bout of exocytosis can dramatically increase the surface area of presynaptic terminals, this extra membrane is removed within a few minutes. Heuser and Reese performed another important set of experiments showing that the fused vesicle membrane is actually retrieved and taken back into the cytoplasm of the nerve terminal. The experiments, again carried out at the frog neuromuscular junction, were based on filling the synaptic cleft with horseradish peroxidase, an enzyme that can be made to produce a dense reaction product that is visible in an electron microscope. Under appropriate experimental conditions, endocytosis could then be visualized by the uptake of HRP into the nerve terminal These observations indicate that synaptic vesicle membrane is recycled within the presynaptic terminal via the sequence summarized in The precursors to synaptic vesicles originally are produced in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus in the neuronal cell body. Because of the long distance between the cell body and the presynaptic terminal in most neurons, transport of vesicles from the soma would not permit rapid replenishment of synaptic vesicles during continuous neural activity. Thus, local recycling is well suited to the peculiar anatomy of neurons, giving nerve terminals the means to provide a continual supply of synaptic vesicles. As might be expected, defects in synaptic vesicle recycling can cause severe neurological disorders, some of which are described in Box B.As was apparent in the experiments of Katz and others described in the preceding sections, lowering the concentration of Ca 2 outside a presynaptic motor nerve terminal reduces the size of the EPP The first indication of presynaptic Ca 2 channels was provided by Katz and Ricardo Miledi. They observed that presynaptic terminals treated with tetrodotoxin could still produce a peculiarly prolonged type of action potential. The explanation for this surprising finding was that current was still flowing through Ca 2 channels, substituting for the current ordinarily carried by the blocked Na  channels. Various steps in the exocytosis and endocytosis of synaptic vesicles are targets of a number of rare but debilitating neurological diseases. Many of these are myasthenic syndromes, in which abnormal transmission at neuromuscular synapses leads to weakness and fatigability of skeletal muscles. One of the best-understood examples of such disorders is the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, an occasional complication in patients with certain kinds of cancers. Biopsies of muscle tissue removed from LEMS patients allow intracellular recordings identical to those shown in Congenital myasthenic syndromes are genetic disorders that also cause muscle weakness by affecting neuromuscular transmission. Some of these syndromes affect the acetylcholinesterase that degrades acetylcholine in the synaptic cleft, whereas others arise from autoimmune attack of acetylcholine receptors. However, a number of congenital myasthenic syndromes arise from defects in acetylcholine release due to altered synaptic vesicle traffic within the motor neuron terminal. Neuromuscular synapses in some of these patients have EPPs with reduced quantal content, a deficit that is especially prominent when the synapse is activated repeatedly. Electron microscopy shows that presynaptic motor nerve terminals have a greatly reduced number of synaptic vesicles. The defect in neurotransmitter release evidently results from an inadequate number of synaptic vesicles available for release during sustained presynaptic activity. The origins of this shortage of synaptic vesicles is not clear, but could result either from an impairment in endocytosis in the nerve terminal That Ca 2 entry into presynaptic terminals causes a rise in the concentration of Ca 2 within the terminal has been documented by microscopic imaging of terminals filled with Ca 2 -sensitive fluorescent dyes While Ca 2 is a universal trigger for transmitter release, not all transmitters are released with the same speed. For example, while secretion of ACh Synaptic Transmission 109 of the most potent toxins known, including several botulinum toxins and tetanus toxin. Both botulism and tetanus are potentially deadly disorders.Botulism can occur by consuming food containing Clostridium bacteria or by infection of wounds with the spores of these ubiquitous organisms. In either case, the presence of the toxin can cause paralysis of peripheral neuromuscular synapses due to abolition of neurotransmitter release. This interference with neuromuscular transmission causes skeletal muscle weakness, in extreme cases producing respiratory failure due to paralysis of the diaphragm and other muscles required for breathing. Botulinum toxins also block synapses innervating the smooth muscles of several organs, giving rise to visceral motor dysfunction.Tetanus typically results from the contamination of puncture wounds by Clostridium bacteria that produce tetanus toxin. In contrast to botulism, tetanus poisoning blocks the release of inhibitory transmitters from interneurons in the spinal cord. This effect causes a loss of synaptic inhibition on spinal motor neurons, producing hyperexcitation of skeletal muscle and tetanic contractions in affected muscles.Although their clinical consequences are dramatically different, clostridial toxins have a common mechanism of action Precisely how an increase in presynaptic Ca 2 concentration goes on to trigger vesicle fusion and neurotransmitter release is not understood. However, many important clues have come from molecular studies that have identified and characterized the proteins found on synaptic vesicles and their binding Most, if not all, of these proteins act at one or more steps in the synaptic vesicle cycle. Although a complete molecular picture of neurotransmitter release is still lacking, the roles of several proteins involved in vesicle fusion have been deduced. Several of the proteins important for neurotransmitter release are also involved in other types of membrane fusion events common to all cells. For example, two proteins originally found to be important for the fusion of vesicles with membranes of the Golgi apparatus, the ATPase NSF and SNAPs, are also involved in priming synaptic vesicles for fusion. These two proteins work by regulating the assembly of other proteins that are called SNAREs. One of these SNARE proteins, synaptobrevin, is in the membrane of synaptic vesicles, while two other SNARE proteins called syntaxin and SNAP-25 are found primarily on the plasma membrane. These SNARE proteins can form a macromolecular complex that spans the two membranes, thus bringing them into close apposition Still other proteins appear to be involved at subsequent steps of the synaptic vesicle cycle In summary, a complex cascade of proteins, acting in a defined temporal and spatial order, allows neurons to secrete transmitters. Although the detailed mechanisms responsible for transmitter secretion are not completely clear, rapid progress is being made toward this goal.The generation of postsynaptic electrical signals is also understood in considerable depth. Such studies began in 1907, when the British physiologist John N. Langley introduced the concept of receptor molecules to explain the specific and potent actions of certain chemicals on muscle and nerve cells. Much subsequent work has shown that receptor molecules do indeed account for the ability of neurotransmitters, hormones, and drugs to alter the Several important insights about the molecular basis of neurotransmitter secretion have come from analyzing the actions of a series of biological toxins produced by a fascinating variety of organisms. One family of such agents is the clostridial toxins responsible for botulism and tetanus. Clever and patient biochemical work has shown that these toxins are highly specific proteases that cleave presynaptic SNARE proteins Still other toxins produced by snakes, snails, spiders, and other predatory animals are known to affect transmitter release, but their sites of action have yet to be identified. Based on the precedents described here, it is likely that these biological poisons will continue to provide valuable tools for elucidating the molecular basis of neurotransmitter release, just as they will continue to enable the predators to feast on their prey. functional properties of neurons. While it has been clear since Langleys day that receptors are important for synaptic transmission, their identity and detailed mechanism of action remained a mystery until quite recently. It is now known that neurotransmitter receptors are proteins embedded in the plasma membrane of postsynaptic cells. Domains of receptor molecules that extend into the synaptic cleft bind neurotransmitters that are released into this space by the presynaptic neuron. The binding of neurotransmitters, either directly or indirectly, causes ion channels in the postsynaptic membrane to open or close. Typically, the resulting ion fluxes change the membrane potential of the postsynaptic cell, thus mediating the transfer of information across the synapse.Just as studies of the neuromuscular synapse paved the way for understanding neurotransmitter release mechanisms, this peripheral synapse has been equally valuable for understanding the mechanisms that allow neurotransmitter receptors to generate postsynaptic signals. The binding of ACh to postsynaptic receptors opens ion channels in the muscle fiber membrane. This effect can be demonstrated directly by using the patch clamp method to measure the minute postsynaptic currents that flow when two molecules of individual ACh bind to receptors, as Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann first did in 1976. Exposure of the extracellular surface of a patch of postsynaptic membrane to ACh causes single-channel currents to flow for a few milliseconds The electrical actions of ACh are greatly multiplied when an action potential in a presynaptic motor neuron causes the release of millions of molecules of ACh into the synaptic cleft. In this more physiological case, the transmitter molecules bind to many thousands of ACh receptors packed in a dense array on the postsynaptic membrane, transiently opening a very large number of postsynaptic ion channels. Although individual ACh receptors only open briefly, The identity of the ions that flow during the EPC can be determined via the same approaches used to identify the roles of Na  and K  fluxes in the currents underlying action potentials. Key to such an analysis is identifying the membrane potential at which no current flows during transmitter action. When the potential of the postsynaptic muscle cell is controlled by the voltage clamp method As was the case for currents flowing through voltage-gated ion channels, the magnitude of the EPC at any membrane potential is given by the product of the ionic conductance activated by ACh and the electrochemical driving force on the ions flowing through ligand-gated channels. Thus, the value of the EPC is given by the relationshipwhere E rev is the reversal potential for the EPC. This relationship predicts that the EPC will be an inward current at potentials more negative than E rev because the electrochemical driving force, V m -E rev , is a negative number. Further, the EPC will become smaller at potentials approaching E rev because the driving force is reduced. At potentials more positive than E rev , the EPC is outward because the driving force is reversed in direction. Because the channels opened by ACh are largely insensitive to membrane voltage, g ACh will depend only on the number of channels opened by ACh, which depends in turn on the concentration of ACh in the synaptic cleft. Thus, the magnitude and polarity of the postsynaptic membrane potential determines the direction and amplitude of the EPC solely by altering the driving force on ions flowing through the receptor channels opened by ACh.When V m is at the reversal potential, V m -E rev is equal to 0 and there is no net driving force on the ions that can permeate the receptor-activated channel. As a result, the identity of the ions that flow during the EPC can be deduced by observing how the reversal potential of the EPC compares to the equilibrium potential for various ion species The fact that EPCs reverse at approximately 0 mV is therefore consistent with the idea that ACh-activated ion channels are almost equally permeable to both Na  and K  . This was tested in 1960, by the husband and wife team of Akira and Noriko Takeuchi, by altering the extracellular concentration of these two ions. As predicted, the magnitude and reversal potential of the EPC was changed by altering the concentration gradient of each ion. Lowering the external Na  concentration, which makes E Na more negative, produces a negative shift in E rev Even though the channels opened by the binding of ACh to its receptors are permeable to both Na  and K  , at the resting membrane potential the EPC is generated primarily by Na  influx Were it possible to measure the EPP at the same time as the EPC, the EPP would be seen to vary in parallel with the amplitude and polarity of the EPC . However, at 0 mV, the EPP reverses its polarity, and at more positive potentials, the EPP is hyperpolarizing. Thus, the polarity and magnitude of the EPC depend on the electrochemical driving force, which in turn determines the polarity and magnitude of the EPP. EPPs will depolarize when the membrane potential is more negative than E rev , and hyperpolarize when the membrane potential is more positive than E rev . The general rule, then, is that  Although this discussion has focused on the neuromuscular junction, similar mechanisms generate postsynaptic responses at all chemical synapses. The general principle is that transmitter binding to postsynaptic receptors produces a postsynaptic conductance change as ion channels are opened. The postsynaptic conductance is increased if-as at the neuromuscular junction-channels are opened, and decreased if channels are closed. This conductance change typically generates an electrical current, the postsynaptic current, which in turn changes the postsynaptic membrane potential to produce a postsynaptic potential. As in the specific case of the EPP at the neuromuscular junction, PSPs are depolarizing if their reversal potential is more positive than the postsynaptic membrane potential and hyperpolarizing if their reversal potential is more negative.The conductance changes and the PSPs that typically accompany them are the ultimate outcome of most chemical synaptic transmission, concluding a sequence of electrical and chemical events that begins with the invasion of an action potential into the terminals of a presynaptic neuron. In many ways, the events that produce PSPs at synapses are similar to those that generate action potentials in axons in both cases, conductance changes produced by ion channels lead to ionic current flow that changes the membrane potential PSPs ultimately alter the probability that an action potential will be produced in the postsynaptic cell. At the neuromuscular junction, synaptic action increases the probability that an action potential will occur in the postsynaptic muscle cell indeed, the large amplitude of the EPP ensures that an action potential always is triggered. At many other synapses, PSPs similarly increase the probability of firing a postsynaptic action potential. However, still other synapses actually decrease the probability that the postsynaptic cell will generate an action potential. PSPs are called excitatory if they increase the likelihood of a postsynaptic action potential occurring, and inhibitory if they decrease this likelihood. Given that most neurons receive inputs from both excitatory and inhibitory synapses, it is important to understand more precisely the mechanisms that determine whether a particular synapse excites or inhibits its postsynaptic partner.The principles of excitation just described for the neuromuscular junction are pertinent to all excitatory synapses. The principles of postsynaptic inhibition are much the same as for excitation, and are also quite general. In both cases, neurotransmitters binding to receptors open or close ion channels in the postsynaptic cell. Whether a postsynaptic response is an EPSP or an IPSP depends on the type of channel that is coupled to the receptor, and on the concentration of permeant ions inside and outside the cell. In fact, the only distinction between postsynaptic excitation and inhibition is the reversal potential of the PSP in relation to the threshold voltage for generating action potentials in the postsynaptic cell.Consider, for example, a neuronal synapse that uses glutamate as the transmitter. Many such synapses have receptors that, like the ACh receptors at neuromuscular synapses, open ion channels that are nonselectively permeable to cations. When these glutamate receptors are activated, both Na  and K  flow across the postsynaptic membrane, yielding an E rev of approximately 0 mV for the resulting postsynaptic current. If the rest-ing potential of the postsynaptic neuron is -60 mV, the resulting EPSP will depolarize by bringing the postsynaptic membrane potential toward 0 mV. For the hypothetical neuron shown in As an example of inhibitory postsynaptic action, consider a neuronal synapse that uses GABA as its transmitter. At such synapses, the GABA receptors typically open channels that are selectively permeable to Cl -and the action of GABA causes Cl -to flow across the postsynaptic membrane. Consider a case where E Cl is -70 mV, as is typical for many neurons, so that the postsynaptic resting potential of -60 mV is less negative than E Cl . The resulting positive electrochemical driving force will cause negatively charged Cl -to flow into the cell and produce a hyperpolarizing IPSP Although the particulars of postsynaptic action can be complex, a simple rule distinguishes postsynaptic excitation from inhibition: An EPSP has a reversal potential more positive than the action potential threshold, whereas   an IPSP has a reversal potential more negative than threshold The PSPs produced at most synapses in the brain are much smaller than those at the neuromuscular junction indeed, EPSPs produced by individual excitatory synapses may be only a fraction of a millivolt and are usually well below the threshold for generating postsynaptic action potentials. How, then, can such synapses transmit information if their PSPs are subthresholdThe answer is that neurons in the central nervous system are typically innervated by thousands of synapses, and the PSPs produced by each active synapse can sum together-in space and in time-to determine the behavior of the postsynaptic neuron.Consider the highly simplified case of a neuron that is innervated by two excitatory synapses, each generating a subthreshold EPSP, and an inhibitory synapse that produces an IPSP The opening or closing of postsynaptic ion channels is accomplished in different ways by two broad families of receptor proteins. The receptors in one family-called ionotropic receptors-are linked directly to ion channels. These receptors contain two functional domains: an extracellular site that binds neurotransmitters, and a membrane-spanning domain that forms an ion channel The second family of neurotransmitter receptors are the metabotropic receptors, so called because the eventual movement of ions through a channel depends on one or more metabolic steps. These receptors do not have ion channels as part of their structure instead, they affect channels by the activation of intermediate molecules called G-proteins Perhaps the most important principle to keep in mind is that the response elicited at a given synapse depends upon the neurotransmitter released and the postsynaptic complement of receptors and associated channels. The molecular mechanisms that allow neurotransmitters and their receptors to generate synaptic responses are considered in the next chapter. Synapses communicate the information carried by action potentials from one neuron to the next in neural circuits. The cellular mechanisms that underlie synaptic transmission are closely related to the mechanisms that generate other types of neuronal electrical signals, namely ion flow through membrane channels. In the case of electrical synapses, these channels are gap junctions direct but passive flow of current through the gap junctions is the basis for transmission. In the case of chemical synapses, channels with smaller and more selective pores are activated by the binding of neurotransmitters to postsynaptic receptors after release from the presynaptic terminal. The large number of neurotransmitters in the nervous system can be divided into two broad classes: small-molecule transmitters and neuropeptides. Neurotransmitters are synthesized from defined precursors by regulated enzymatic pathways, packaged into one of several types of synaptic vesicle, and released into the synaptic cleft in a Ca 2 -dependent manner. Many synapses release more than one type of neurotransmitter, and multiple transmitters can even be packaged within the same synaptic vesicle. Transmitter agents are released presynaptically in units or quanta, reflecting their storage within synaptic vesicles. Vesicles discharge their contents into the synaptic cleft when the presynaptic depolarization generated by the invasion of an action potential opens voltage-gated calcium channels, allowing Ca 2 to enter the presynaptic terminal. How calcium triggers neurotransmitter release is not yet established, but synaptotagmin, SNAREs, and a number of other proteins found within the presynaptic terminal are clearly involved. Postsynaptic receptors are a diverse group of proteins that transduce binding of neurotransmitters into electrical signals by opening or closing postsynaptic ion channels. The postsynaptic currents produced by the synchronous opening or closing of ion channels changes the conductance of the postsynaptic cell, thus increasing or decreasing its excitability. Conductance changes that increase the probability of firing an action potential are excitatory, whereas those that decrease the probability of generating an action potential are inhibitory. Because postsynaptic neurons are usually innervated by many different inputs, the integrated effect of the conductance changes underlying all EPSPs and IPSPs produced in a postsynaptic cell at any moment determines whether or not the cell fires an action potential. Two broadly different families of neurotransmitter receptors have evolved to carry out the postsynaptic signaling actions of neurotransmitters. The postsynaptic effects of neurotransmitters are terminated by the degradation of the transmitter in the synaptic cleft, by transport of the transmitter back into cells, or by diffusion out of the synaptic cleft.For the most part, neurons in the human brain communicate with one another by releasing chemical messengers called neurotransmitters. A large number of neurotransmitters are now known and more remain to be discovered. Neurotransmitters evoke postsynaptic electrical responses by binding to members of a diverse group of proteins called neurotransmitter receptors.There are two major classes of receptors: those in which the receptor molecule is also an ion channel, and those in which the receptor and ion channel are separate molecules. The former are called ionotropic receptors or ligandgated ion channels, and give rise to fast postsynaptic responses that typically last only a few milliseconds. The latter are called metabotropic receptors, and they produce slower postsynaptic effects that may endure much longer. Abnormalities in the function of neurotransmitter systems contribute to a wide range of neurological and psychiatric disorders. As a result, many neuropharmacological therapies are based on drugs that affect neurotransmitter release, binding, andor removal.More than 100 different agents are known to serve as neurotransmitters. This large number of transmitters allows for tremendous diversity in chemical signaling between neurons. It is useful to separate this panoply of transmitters into two broad categories based simply on size As mentioned in the previous chapter, acetylcholine was the first substance identified as a neurotransmitter. In addition to the action of ACh as the neurotransmitter at skeletal neuromuscular junctions, as well as the neuromuscular synapse between the vagus nerve and cardiac 