Similarly, knowledge about the indirect pathway within the basal ganglia helps explain the motor abnormalities seen in Huntingtons disease. In patients with Huntingtons disease, medium spiny neurons that project to the external segment of the globus pallidus degenerate As predicted by this account, GABA agonists and antagonists applied to substantia nigra pars reticulata of monkeys produce symptoms similar to those seen in human basal ganglia disease. For example, intranigral injection of bicuculline, which blocks the GABAergic inputs from the striatal medium spiny neurons to the reticulata cells, increases the amount of tonic inhibition on the upper motor neurons in the deep collicular layers. These animals exhibit fewer, slower saccades, reminiscent of patients with Parkinsons disease. In contrast, injections of the GABA agonist muscimol into substantia nigra pars reticulata decrease the tonic GABAergic inhibition of the upper motor neurons in the superior colliculus, with the result that the injected monkeys generate spontaneous, irrepressible saccades that resemble the involuntary movements characteristic of basal ganglia diseases such as hemiballismus and Huntingtons disease Left visual field Right visual fieldSubstantia nigra pars reticulata Muscimol injection Traditionally, the basal ganglia have been regarded as motor structures that regulate the initiation of movements. However, the basal ganglia are also central structures in anatomical circuits or loops that are involved in modulating non-motor aspects of behavior. These parallel loops originate in broad regions of the cortex, engage specific subdivisions of the basal ganglia and thalamus, and ultimately terminate in areas of the frontal lobe outside of the primary motor and premotor cortices. These non-motor loops The contribution of the basal ganglia to motor control is apparent from the deficits that result from damage to the component nuclei. Such lesions compromise the initiation and performance of voluntary movements, as exemplified by the paucity of movement in Parkinsons disease and in the inappropriate "release" of movements in Huntingtons disease. The organization of the basic circuitry of the basal ganglia indicates how this constellation of nuclei modulates movement. With respect to motor function, the system forms a loop that originates in almost every area of the cerebral cortex and eventually terminates, after enormous convergence within the basal ganglia, on the upper motor neurons in the motor and premotor areas of the frontal lobe and in the superior colliculus. The efferent neurons of the basal ganglia influence the upper motor neurons in the cortex by gating the flow of information through relays in the ventral nuclei of the thalamus. The upper motor neurons in the superior colliculus that initiate saccadic eye movements are controlled by monosynaptic projections from substantia nigra pars reticulata. In each case, the basal ganglia loop regulates movement by a process of disinhibition that results from the serial interaction within the basal ganglia circuitry of two GABAergic neurons. Internal circuits within the basal ganglia system modulate the amplification of the signals that are transmitted through the loop.In fact, a variety of other disorders are now thought to be caused, at least in part, by damage to non-motor components of the basal ganglia. For example, patients with Tourettes syndrome produce inappropriate utterances and obscenities as well as unwanted vocalmotor "tics" and repetitive grunts. These manifestations may be a result of excessive activity in basal ganglia loops that regulate the cognitive circuitry of the prefrontal speech areas. Another example is schizophrenia, which some investigators have argued is associated with aberrant activity within the limbic and prefrontal loops, resulting in hallucinations, delusions, disordered thoughts, and loss of emotional expression. In support of the argument for a basal ganglia contribution to schizophrenia, antipsychotic drugs are known to act on dopaminergic receptors, which are found in high concentrations in the striatum. Still other psychiatric disorders, including obsessive-compulsive disorder, depression, and chronic anxiety, may also involve dysfunctions of the limbic loop. A challenge for future research is therefore to understand more fully the relationships between the clinical problems and other largely unexplored functions of the basal ganglia.In contrast to the upper motor neurons described in Chapter 16, the efferent cells of the cerebellum do not project directly either to the local circuits of the brainstem and spinal cord that organize movement, or to the lower motor neurons that innervate muscles. Instead-like the basal ganglia-the cerebellum influences movements by modifying the activity patterns of the upper motor neurons. In fact, the cerebellum sends prominent projections to virtually all upper motor neurons. Structurally, the cerebellum has two main components: a laminated cerebellar cortex, and a subcortical cluster of cells referred to collectively as the deep cerebellar nuclei. Pathways that reach the cerebellum from other brain regions project to both components thus, the afferent axons send branches to both the deep nuclei and the cerebellar cortex. The output cells of the cerebellar cortex project to the deep cerebellar nuclei, which give rise to the main efferent pathways that leave the cerebellum to regulate upper motor neurons in the cerebral cortex and brainstem. Thus, much like the basal ganglia, the cerebellum is part of a vast loop that receives projections from and sends projections back to the cerebral cortex and brainstem. The primary function of the cerebellum is evidently to detect the difference, or "motor error," between an intended movement and the actual movement, and, through its projections to the upper motor neurons, to reduce the error. These corrections can be made both during the course of the movement and as a form of motor learning when the correction is stored. When this feedback loop is damaged, as occurs in many cerebellar diseases, the afflicted individuals make persistent movement errors whose specific character depends on the location of the damage.The cerebellum can be subdivided into three main parts based on differences in their sources of input The connections between the cerebellum and other parts of the nervous system occur by way of three large pathways called cerebellar peduncles middle cerebellar peduncle The cerebral cortex is by far the largest source of inputs to the cerebellum, and the major destination of these inputs is the cerebrocerebellum Finally, the entire cerebellum receives modulatory inputs from the inferior olive and the locus ceruleus in the brainstem. These nuclei evidently participate in the learning and memory functions served by cerebellar circuitry.Except for a direct projection from the vestibulocerebellum to the vestibular nuclei, the cerebellar cortex projects to the deep cerebellar nuclei, which project in turn to upper motor neurons in the cortex and in the brainstem Anatomical studies using viruses to trace chains of connections between nerve cells have shown that large parts of the cerebrocerebellum send information back to non-motor areas of the cortex to form "closed loops." That is, a region of the cerebellum projects back to the same cortical area that in turn projects to it. These closed loops run in parallel to "open loops" that receive input from multiple cortical areas and funnel output back to upper motor neurons in specific regions of the motor and premotor cortices The ultimate destination of the afferent pathways to the cerebellar cortex is a distinctive cell type called the Purkinje cell The Purkinje cells present the most striking histological feature of the cerebellum. Elaborate dendrites extend into the molecular layer from a single subjacent layer of these giant nerve cell bodies. Once in the molecular layer, the Purkinje cell dendrites branch extensively in a plane at right angles to the trajectory of the parallel fibers Inputs from local circuit neurons modulate the inhibitory activity of Purkinje cells and occur on both dendritic shafts and the cell body. The most powerful of these local inputs are inhibitory complexes of synapses made around the Purkinje cell bodies by basket cells This basic circuit is repeated over and over throughout every subdivision of the cerebellum in all mammals and is the fundamental functional module of the cerebellum. Modulation of signal flow through these modules provides the basis for both real-time regulation of movement and the long-term changes in regulation that underlie motor learning. The flow of signals through this admittedly complex intrinsic circuitry is best described in reference to the Purkinje cells Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is a rare but devastating neurological disorder characterized by cerebellar ataxia, myoclonic jerks, seizures, and the fulminant progression of dementia. The onset is usually in middle age, and death typically follows within a year. The distinctive histopathology of the disease, termed "spongiform degeneration," consists of neuronal loss and extensive glial proliferation, mainly in the cortex of the cerebellum and cerebrum the peculiar spongiform pattern is due to vacuoles in the cytoplasm of neurons and glia. CJD is the only human disease known to be transmitted by inoculation or inherited through the germline In contrast to other transmissible diseases mediated by microorganisms such as viruses or bacteria, the agent in this case is a protein called a prion.Observations dating back some 30 years suggested that CJD was infective. The major clue came from scrapie, a once-obscure disease of sheep that is also characterized by cerebellar ataxia, wasting, and intense itching. The ability to transmit scrapie from one sheep to another strongly suggested an infectious agent. Another clue came from the work of Carlton Gajdusek, a neurologist studying a peculiar human disease called kuru that occurred specifically in a group of New Guinea natives known to practice ritual cannibalism. Like CJD, kuru is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by devastating cerebellar ataxia and subsequent dementia, usually leading to death within a year. The striking similarities in the distinctive histopathology of scrapie and kuru-namely spongiform degeneration-suggested a common pathogenesis and led to the successful transmission of kuru to apes and chimpanzees in the 1960s, confirming that CJD was indeed infectious. The prolonged period between inoculation and disease onset led Gajdusek to suggest that the transmissible agent was what he called a "slow virus."These extraordinary findings spurred an intensive search for the infectious agent. The transmission of scrapie from sheep to hamsters by Stanley Prusiner at the University of California at San Francisco permitted biochemical characterization of partially purified fractions of scrapie agent from hamster brain. Oddly, he found that the infectivity was extraordinarily resistant to ultraviolet irradiation or nucleases, both treatments that degrade nucleic acids. It therefore seemed unlikely that a virus could be the causal agent. Conversely, procedures that modified or degraded proteins markedly diminished infectivity. In 1982, Prusiner coined the term prion to refer to the agent causing these transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. He chose the term to emphasize that the agent was a proteinaceous infectious particle. Subsequently, a half dozen more diseases of animals-including the widely publicized bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or "mad cow disease"-and four more human diseases have been shown to be caused by prions.Whether prions contain undetected nucleic acids or are really proteins remained controversial for some years. Prusiner strongly advocated a "protein only" hypothesis, a revolutionary concept with respect to transmissible diseases. He proposed that the prion is a protein consisting of a modified form of the normal host protein, the propagation of which occurs by a conformational change of endogenous PrP C to PrP Sc autocatalyzed by PrP Sc . That is, the modified form of the protein transforms the normal form into the modified form, much as crystals form in supersaturated solutions. Differences in the secondary structure of PrP C and PrP Sc evident by optical spectroscopy supported this idea. An alternative hypothesis, however, was that the agent is simply an unconventional nucleic acid-containing virus, and that the accumulation of PrP Sc is an incidental consequence of infection and cell death.A compelling body of evidence in support of the "protein only" hypothesis has emerged only in the past decade. First, PrP Sc and scrapie infectivity copurify by a number of procedures, including affinity chromatography using an anti-PrP monoclonal antibody no nucleic acid has been detected in highly purified preparations, despite intensive efforts. Second, spongiform encephalopathies can be inherited in humans, and the cause is now known to be a mutation in the gene coding for PrP. Third, transgenic mice carrying a mutant PrP gene equivalent to one of the mutations of inherited human prion disease develop a spongiform encephalopathy. Thus, a defective protein is sufficient to account for the disease. Finally, transgenic mice carrying a null mutation for PrP do not develop spongiform encephalopathy when inoculated with scrapie agent, whereas wild-type mice do. These results argue convincingly that PrP Sc must indeed interact with endogenous PrP C to convert PrP C to PrP Sc , propagating the disease in the process. The protein is highly conserved across mammalian species, suggesting that it serves some essential function, although mice carrying a null mutation of PrP exhibit no detectable abnormalities.These advances notwithstanding, many questions remain. What is the mechanism by which the conformational transformation of PrP C to PrP Sc occurs How do mutations at different sites of the same protein culminate in the distinct phenotypes evident in diverse prion diseases of humans Are conformational changes of proteins a common mechaspatial distribution of Purkinje cell activity. The Purkinje cells modulate the activity of the deep cerebellar nuclei, which are driven by the direct excitatory input they receive from the collaterals of the mossy and climbing fibers.The modulation of cerebellar output also occurs at the level of the Purkinje cells As expected for a structure that monitors and regulates motor behavior, neuronal activity in the cerebellum changes continually during the course of a movement. For instance, the execution of a relatively simple task like flipping the wrist back and forth elicits a dynamic pattern of activity in both the Purkinje cells and the deep cerebellar nuclear cells that closely follows the ongoing movement As these neuronal response properties predict, cerebellar lesions and disease tend to disrupt the modulation and coordination of ongoing movements. Thus, the hallmark of patients with cerebellar damage is difficulty producing smooth, well-coordinated movements. Instead, movements tend to be jerky and imprecise, a condition referred to as cerebellar ataxia. Many of these difficulties in performing movements can be explained as disruption of the cerebellums role in correcting errors in ongoing movements. Normally, the cerebellar error correction mechanism ensures that move-nism of other neurodegenerative diseases And do these findings suggest a therapy for the dreadful manifestations of spongiform encephalopathiesDespite these unanswered questions, this work remains one of the most exciting chapters in modern neurological research, and rightly won Nobel Prizes in Physiology or Medicine for both As in the case of the basal ganglia, studies of the oculomotor system have contributed greatly to understanding the contribution that the cerebellum makes to motor error reduction. For example, cutting part of the tendon to the lateral rectus muscles in one eye of a monkey weakens horizontal eye movements by that eye Similar evidence of the cerebellar contribution to movement has come from studies of the vestibulo-ocular reflex in monkeys and humans. The VOR works to keep the eyes trained on a visual target during head movements. The relative simplicity of this reflex has made it possible to analyze some of the mechanisms that enable motor learning as a process of error reduction. When a visual image on the retina shifts its position as a result of head movement, the eyes must move at the same velocity in the opposite direction to maintain a stable percept. In these studies, the  Time TimeTime Time As mentioned in the preceding discussion, patients with cerebellar damage, regardless of the causes or location, exhibit persistent errors in movement. These movement errors are always on the same side of the body as the damage to the cerebellum, reflecting the cerebellums unusual status as a brain structure in which sensory and motor information is represented ipsilaterally rather than contralaterally. Furthermore, somatic, visual, and other inputs are represented topographically within the cerebellum as a result, the movement deficits may be quite specific. For example, one of the most common cerebellar syndromes is caused by degeneration in the anterior portion of the cerebellar cortex in patients with a long history of alcohol abuse The implication of these pathologies is that the cerebellum is normally capable of integrating the moment-to-moment actions of muscles and joints throughout the body to ensure the smooth execution of a full range of motor behaviors. Thus, cerebellar lesions lead first and foremost to a lack of coordination of ongoing movements. For example, damage to the vestibulocerebellum impairs the ability to stand upright and maintain the direction of gaze. The eyes have difficulty maintaining fixation they drift from the target and then jump back with a corrective saccade, a phenomenon called nystagmus. Disruption of the pathways to the vestibular nuclei may also result in a loss of muscle tone. In contrast, patients with damage to the spinocerebellum have difficulty controlling walking movements they have a widebased gait with small shuffling movements, which represents the inappropriate operation of groups of muscles that normally rely on sensory feedback to produce smooth, concerted actions. The patients also have difficulty performing rapid alternating movements such as the heel-to-shin andor finger-to-nose tests, a sign referred to as dysdiadochokinesia. Overand underreaching may also occur. During the movement, tremors-called action or intention tremors-accompany over-and undershooting of the movement due to disruption of the mechanism for detecting and correcting movement errors. Finally, lesions of the cerebrocerebellum produce impairments in highly skilled sequences of learned movements, such as speech or playing a musical instrument. The common denominator of all of these signs, regardless of the site of the lesion, is the inability to perform smooth, directed movements.The cerebellum receives input from regions of the cerebral cortex that plan and initiate complex and highly skilled movements it also receives innervation from sensory systems that monitor the course of movements. This arrangement enables a comparison of an intended movement with the actual movement and a reduction in the difference, or "motor error." The corrections of motor error produced by the cerebellum occur both in real time and over longer periods, as motor learning. For example, the vestibulo-ocular reflex allows an observer to fixate an object of interest while the head moves however, lenses that change image size produce a long-term change in the gain of this reflex that depends on an intact cerebellum. Knowledge of cerebellar circuitry suggests that motor learning is mediated by climbing fibers that ascend from the inferior olive to contact the dendrites of the Purkinje cells in the cerebellar cortex. Information provided by the climbing fibers modulates the effectiveness of the second major input to the Purkinje cells, which arrives via the parallel fibers from the granule cells. The granule cells receive information about the intended movement from the vast number of mossy fibers that enter the cerebellum from multiple sources, including the cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathway. As might be expected, the output of the cerebellum from the deep cerebellar nuclei projects to all the major sources of upper motor neurons described in Chapter 16. The effects of cerebellar disease provide strong support for the idea that the cerebellum regulates the performance of movements. Thus, patients with cerebellar disorders show severe ataxias in which the site of the lesion determines the particular movements affected. Since the early 1950s, investigators interested in motor behavior have identified and studied strains of mutant mice in which movement is compromised. These mutant mice are easy to spot: following induced or spontaneous mutagenesis, the "screen" is simply to look for animals that have difficulty moving. Genetic analysis suggested that some of these abnormal behaviors could be explained by single autosomal recessive or semidominant mutations, in which homozygotes are most severely affected. The strains were given names like reeler, weaver, lurcher, staggerer, and leaner that reflected the nature of the motor dysfunction they exhibited A common feature of the mutants is ataxia resembling that associated with cerebellar dysfunction in humans. Indeed, all the mutations are associated with some form of cerebellar pathology. The pathologies associated with the reeler and weaver mutations are particularly striking. In the reeler cerebellum, Purkinje cells, granule cells, and interneurons are all displaced from their usual laminar positions, and there are fewer granule cells than normal. In weaver, most of the granule cells are lost prior to their migration from the external granule layer, leaving only Purkinje cells and interneurons to carry on the work of the cerebellum. Thus, these mutations causing deficits in motor behavior impair the development and final disposition of the neurons that comprise the major processing circuits of the cerebellum Efforts to characterize the cellular mechanisms underlying these motor deficits were unsuccessful, and the molecular identity of the affected genes remained obscure until recently. In the past few years, however, both the reeler and weaver genes have been identified and cloned.The reeler gene was cloned through a combination of good luck and careful observation. In the course of making transgenic mice by inserting DNA fragments in the mouse genome, investigators in Tom Currans laboratory created a new strain of mice that behaved much like reeler mice and had similar cerebellar pathology. This "synthetic" reeler mutation was identified by finding the position of the novel DNA fragment-which turned out to be on the same chromo-  Additional Reading Eye movements are, in many ways, easier to study than movements of other parts of the body. This fact arises from the relative simplicity of muscle actions on the eyeball. There are only six extraocular muscles, each of which has a specific role in adjusting eye position. Moreover, there are only four stereotyped kinds of eye movements, each with its own control circuitry. Eye movements have therefore been a useful model for understanding the mechanisms of motor control. Indeed, much of what is known about the regulation of movements by the cerebellum, basal ganglia, and vestibular system has come from the study of eye movements.Here the major features of eye movement control are used to illustrate the principles of sensory motor integration that also apply to more complex motor behaviors.Eye movements are important in humans because high visual acuity is restricted to the fovea, the small circular region in the central retina that is densely packed with cone photoreceptors. Eye movements can direct the fovea to new objects of interest or compensate for disturbances that cause the fovea to be displaced from a target already being attended to. As demonstrated several decades ago by the Russian physiologist Alfred Yarbus, eye movements reveal a good deal about the strategies used to inspect a scene. Yarbus used contact lenses with small mirrors on them to document the pattern of eye movements made while subjects examined a variety of objects and scenes. 453 Eye Movements and Sensory Motor Integration information. As is apparent in The importance of eye movements for visual perception has also been demonstrated by experiments in which a visual image is stabilized on the retina, either by paralyzing the extraocular eye muscles or by moving a scene in exact register with eye movements so that the different features of the image always fall on exactly the same parts of the retina. Stabilized visual images rapidly disappear, for reasons that remain poorly understood. Nonetheless, these observations on motionless images make it plain that eye movements are also essential for normal visual perception.Three antagonistic pairs of muscles control eye movements: the lateral and medial rectus muscles, the superior and inferior rectus muscles, and the superior and inferior oblique muscles. These muscles are responsible for movements of the eye along three different axes: horizontal, either toward the nose or away from the nose vertical, either elevation or depression and torsional, movements that bring the top of the eye toward the nose or away from the nose. Horizontal movements are controlled entirely by the medial and lateral rectus muscles the medial rectus muscle is responsible for adduction, the lateral rectus muscle for abduction. Vertical movements require the coordinated action of the superior and inferior rectus muscles, as well as the oblique muscles. The relative contribution of the rectus and oblique groups depends on the horizontal position of the eye The extraocular muscles are innervated by lower motor neurons that form three cranial nerves: the abducens, the trochlear, and the oculomotor In addition to supplying the extraocular muscles, a distinct cell group within the oculomotor nucleus innervates the levator muscles of the eyelid the axons from these neurons also travel in the third nerve. Finally, the third  Visual perception depends critically on frequent changes of scene. Normally, our view of the world is changed by saccades, and tiny saccades that continue to move the eyes abruptly over a fraction of a degree of visual arc occur even when the observer stares intently at an object of interest. Moreover, continual drift of the eyes during fixation progressively shifts the image onto a nearby but different set of photoreceptors. As a consequence of these several sorts of eye movements The importance of a continually changing scene for normal vision is dramatically revealed when the retinal image is stabilized. If a small mirror is attached to the eye by means of a contact lens and an image reflected off the mirror onto a screen, then the subject necessarily sees the same thing, whatever the position of the eye: Every time the eye moves, the projected image moves exactly the same amount The conventional interpretation of the rapid disappearance of stabilized images is retinal adaptation. In fact, the phenomenon is at least partly of central origin. Stabilizing the retinal image in one eye, for example, diminishes perception through the other eye, an effect known as interocular transfer. Although the explanation of these remarkable effects is not entirely clear, they emphasize the point that the visual system is designed to deal with novelty.   There are four basic types of eye movements: saccades, smooth pursuit movements, vergence movements, and vestibulo-ocular movements. The functions of each type of eye movement are introduced here in subsequent sections, the neural circuitry responsible for three of these types of movements is presented in more detail.Saccades are rapid, ballistic movements of the eyes that abruptly change the point of fixation. They range in amplitude from the small movements made while reading, for example, to the much larger movements made while gazing around a room. Saccades can be elicited voluntarily, but occur reflexively whenever the eyes are open, even when fixated on a target. The rapid eye movements that occur during an important phase of sleep are also saccades. The time course of a saccadic eye movement is shown in Smooth pursuit movements are much slower tracking movements of the eyes designed to keep a moving stimulus on the fovea. Such movements are under voluntary control in the sense that the observer can choose whether or not to track a moving stimulus The smooth pursuit system can be tested by placing a subject inside a rotating cylinder with vertical stripes. The eyes automatically follow a stripe until they reach the end of their excursion. There is then a quick saccade in the direction opposite to the movement, followed once again by smooth pursuit of a stripe. This alternating slow and fast movement of the eyes in response to such stimuli is called optokinetic nystagmus. Optokinetic nystagmus is a normal reflexive response of the eyes in response to large-scale movements of the visual scene and should not be confused with the pathological nystagmus that can result from certain kinds of brain injury.  Vergence movements align the fovea of each eye with targets located at different distances from the observer. Unlike other types of eye movements in which the two eyes move in the same direction, vergence movements are disconjugate they involve either a convergence or divergence of the lines of sight of each eye to see an object that is nearer or farther away. Convergence is one of the three reflexive visual responses elicited by interest in a near object. The other components of the so-called near reflex triad are accommodation of the lens, which brings the object into focus, and pupillary constriction, which increases the depth of field and sharpens the image on the retina.Vestibulo-ocular movements stabilize the eyes relative to the external world, thus compensating for head movements. These reflex responses prevent visual images from "slipping" on the surface of the retina as head position varies. The action of vestibulo-ocular movements can be appreciated by fixating an object and moving the head from side to side the eyes automatically compensate for the head movement by moving the same distance but in the opposite direction, thus keeping the image of the object at more or less the same place on the retina. The vestibular system detects brief, transient changes in head position and produces rapid corrective eye movements. Sensory information from the semicircular canals directs the eyes to move in a direction opposite to the head movement.Although the vestibular system operates effectively to counteract rapid movements of the head, it is relatively insensitive to slow movements or to persistent rotation of the head. For example, if the vestibulo-ocular reflex is tested with continuous rotation and without visual cues about the movement of the image, the compensatory eye movements cease after only about 30 seconds of rotation. However, if the same test is performed with visual cues, eye movements persist. The compensatory eye movements in this case are due to the activation of the smooth pursuit system, which relies not on vestibular information but on visual cues indicating motion of the visual field.The problem of moving the eyes to fixate a new target in space entails two separate issues: controlling the amplitude of , and controlling the direction of the movement. The amplitude of a saccadic eye movement is encoded by the duration of neuronal activity in the lower motor neurons of the oculomotor nuclei. As shown in An example of how the PPRF works with the abducens and oculomotor nuclei to generate a horizontal saccade to the right is shown in Although saccades can occur in complete darkness, they are often elicited when something attracts attention and the observer directs the foveas toward the stimulus. How then is sensory information about the location of a target in space transformed into an appropriate pattern of activity in the horizontal and vertical gaze centers Two structures that project to the gaze centers are demonstrably important for the initiation and accurate targeting of saccadic eye movements: the superior colliculus of the midbrain, and a region of the frontal lobe that lies just rostral to premotor cortex, known as Right PPRF the frontal eye field. Upper motor neurons in both of these structures, each of which contains a topographical motor map, discharge immediately prior to saccades. Thus, activation of a particular site in the superior colliculus or in the frontal eye field produces saccadic eye movements in a specified direction and for a specified distance that is independent of the initial position of the eyes in the orbit. The direction and distance are always the same for a given stimulation site, changing systematically when different sites are activated.Both the superior colliculus and the frontal eye field also contain cells that respond to visual stimuli however, the relation between the sensory and motor responses of individual cells is better understood for the superior colliculus. An orderly map of visual space is established by the termination of retinal axons within the superior colliculus, and this sensory map is in register with the motor map that generates eye movements. Thus, neurons in a particular region of the superior colliculus are activated by the presentation of visual stimuli in a limited region of visual space. This activation leads to the generation of a saccade that moves the eye by an amount just sufficient to align the foveas with the region of visual space that provided the stimulation Neurons in the superior colliculus also respond to auditory and somatic stimuli. Indeed, the location in space for these other modalities also is mapped in register with the motor map in the colliculus. Topographically organized maps of auditory space and of the body surface in the superior colliculus can therefore orient the eyes in response to a variety of different sensory stimuli. This registration of the sensory and motor maps in the colliculus illustrates an important principle of topographical maps in the motor system, namely to provide an efficient mechanism for sensory motor transformations. , and the amplitude and direction of the eye movements elicited by stimulating these sites electrically. In each case, electrical stimulation results in eye movements that align the fovea with a region of visual space that corresponds to the visual receptive field of the site. The superior colliculus is a laminated structure in which the differences between the layers provide clues about how sensory and motor maps interact to produce appropriate movements. As discussed in the text, the superficial or "visual" layer of the colliculus receives input from retinal axons that form a topographic map. Thus, each site in the superficial layer is activated maximally by the presence of a stimulus at a particular point of visual space. In contrast, neurons in the deeper or "motor" layers generate bursts of action potentials that command saccades, effectively generating a motor map thus, activation of different sites generates saccades having different vectors. The visual and motor maps are in register, so that visual cells responding to a stimulus in a specific region of visual space are located directly above the motor cells that command eye movements toward that same region The registration of the visual and motor maps suggests a simple strategy for how the eyes might be guided toward an object of interest in the visual field. When an object appears at a particular location in the visual field, it will activate neurons in the corresponding part of the visual map. As a result, bursts of action potentials are generated by the subjacent motor cells to command a saccade that rotates the two eyes just the right amount to direct the foveas toward that same location in the visual field. This behavior is called "visual grasp" because successful sensory motor integration results in the accurate foveation of a visual target. This seemingly simple model, formulated in the early 1970s when the collicular maps were first found, assumes point to point connections between the visual and motor maps. In practice, however, these connections have been difficult to demonstrate. Neither the anatomical nor the physiological methods available at the time were sufficiently precise to establish these postulated synaptic connections. At about the same time, motor neurons were found to command saccades to nonvisual stimuli moreover, spontaneous saccades occur in the dark. Thus, it was clear that visual layer activity is not always necessary for saccades. To confuse matters further, animals could be trained not to make a saccade when an object appeared in the visual field, showing that the activation of visual neurons is sometimes insufficient to command saccades. The fact that activity of neurons in the visual map is neither necessary nor sufficient for eliciting saccades led investigators away from the simple model of direct connections between corresponding regions of the two maps, toward models that linked the layers indirectly through pathways that detoured through the cortex.Eventually, however, new and better methods resolved this uncertainty.Techniques for filling single cells with axonal tracers showed an overlap between descending visual layer axons and ascending motor layer dendrites, in accord with direct anatomical connections between corresponding regions of the maps. At the same time, in vitro whole-cell patch clamp recording permitted more discriminating functional studies that distinguished excitatory and inhibitory inputs to the motor cells. These experiments showed that the visual and motor layers do indeed have the functional connections required to initiate the command for a visually guided saccadic eye movement. A single brief electrical stimulus delivered to the superficial layer generates a prolonged burst of action potentials that resembles the command bursts that normally occur just before a saccade These direct connections presumably provide the substrate for the very short latency reflex-like "express saccades" that are unaffected by destruction of the frontal eye fields. Other visual and nonvisual inputs to the deep layers probably explain why activation of the retina is neither necessary nor sufficient for the production of saccades. The frontal eye field can thus control eye movements by activating selected populations of superior colliculus neurons. This cortical area also projects directly to the contralateral PPRF as a result, the frontal eye field can also control eye movements independently of the superior colliculus. The parallel inputs to the PPRF from the frontal eye field and superior colliculus are reflected in the deficits that result from damage to these Figure 19.9 The relationship of the frontal eye field in the right cerebral hemisphere to the superior colliculus and the horizontal gaze center. There are two routes by which the frontal eye field can influence eye movements in humans: indirectly by projections to the superior colliculus, which in turn projects to the contralateral PPRF, and directly by projections to the contralateral PPRF.structures. Injury to the frontal eye field results in an inability to make saccades to the contralateral side and a deviation of the eyes to the side of the lesion. These effects are transient, however in monkeys with experimentally induced lesions of this cortical region, recovery is virtually complete in two to four weeks. Lesions of the superior colliculus change the accuracy, frequency, and velocity of saccades yet saccades still occur, and the deficits also improve with time. These results suggest that the frontal eye fields and the superior colliculus provide complementary pathways for the control of saccades. Moreover, one of these structures appears to be able to compensate for the loss of the other. In support of this interpretation, combined lesions of the frontal eye field and the superior colliculus produce a dramatic and permanent loss in the ability to make saccadic eye movements. These observations do not, however, imply that the frontal eye fields and the superior colliculus have the same functions. Superior colliculus lesions Primary motor cortex produce a permanent deficit in the ability to perform very short latency reflex-like eye movements called "express saccades." The express saccades are evidently mediated by direct pathways to the superior colliculus from the retina or visual cortex that can access the upper motor neurons in the colliculus without extensive, and more time-consuming, processing in the frontal cortex. In contrast, frontal eye field lesions produce permanent deficits in the ability to make saccades that are not guided by an external target. For example, patients with a lesion in the frontal eye fields cannot voluntarily direct their eyes away from a stimulus in the visual field, a type of eye movement called an "antisaccade." Such lesions also eliminate the ability to make a saccade to the remembered location of a target that is no longer visible.Finally, the frontal eye fields are essential for systematically scanning the visual field to locate an object of interest within an array of distracting objects Smooth pursuit movements are also mediated by neurons in the PPRF, but are under the influence of motor control centers other than the superior colliculus and frontal eye field. The exact route by which visual information reaches the PPRF to generate smooth pursuit movements is not known. It is clear, however, that neurons in the striate and extrastriate visual areas provide sensory information that is essential for the initiation and accurate guidance of smooth pursuit movements. In monkeys, neurons in the middle temporal area respond selectively to targets moving in a specific direction. Moreover, damage to this area disrupts smooth pursuit movements. In humans, damage of comparable areas in the parietal and occipital lobes also results in abnormalities of smooth pursuit movements. Unlike the effects of lesions to the frontal eye field and the superior colliculus, the deficits are in eye movements made toward the side of the lesion. For example, a lesion of the left parieto-occipital region is likely to result in an inability to track an object moving from right to left.When a person wishes to look from one object to another object that are located at different distances from the eyes, a saccade is made that shifts the direction of gaze toward the new object, and the eyes either diverge or converge until the object falls on the fovea of each eye. The structures and pathways responsible for mediating the vergence movements are not well understood, but appear to include several extrastriate areas in the occipital lobe. Information about the location of retinal activity is relayed through the two lateral geniculate nuclei to the cortex, where the information from the two eyes is integrated. The appropriate command to diverge or converge the eyes, which is based largely on information from the two eyes about the amount of binocular disparity, is then sent via upper motor neurons from the occipital cortex to "vergence centers" in the brainstem. One such center is a population of local circuit neurons located in the midbrain near the oculomotor nucleus. These neurons generate a burst of action potentials. The onset of the burst is the command to generate a vergence movement, and the frequency of the burst determines its velocity.There is a division of labor within the vergence center, so that some neurons command convergence movements while others command divergence movements. These neurons also coordinate vergence movements of the eyes with accommodation of the lens and pupillary constriction to produce the near reflex discussed in Chapter 10.Despite their specialized function, the systems that control eye movements have much in common with the motor systems that govern movements of other parts of the body. Just as the spinal cord provides the basic circuitry for coordinating the actions of muscles around a joint, the reticular formation of the pons and midbrain provides the basic circuitry that mediates movements of the eyes. Descending projections from higher-order centers in the superior colliculus and the frontal eye field innervate the brainstem gaze centers, providing a basis for integrating eye movements with a variety of sensory information that indicates the location of objects in space. The superior colliculus and the frontal eye field are organized in a parallel as well as a hierarchical fashion, enabling one of these structures to compensate for the loss of the other. Eye movements, like other movements, are also under the control of the basal ganglia and cerebellum this control ensures the proper initiation and successful execution of these relatively simple motor behaviors, thus allowing observers to interact efficiently with the universe of things that can be seen.Additional ReadingThe visceral motor system controls involuntary functions mediated by the activity of smooth muscle fibers, cardiac muscle fibers, and glands. The system comprises two major divisions, the sympathetic and parasympathetic subsystems. Although these divisions are always active at some level, the sympathetic subsystem mobilizes the bodys resources for dealing with challenges of one sort or another. Conversely, parasympathetic activity predominates during states of relative quiescence, so that energy sources previously expended can be restored. This continuous neural regulation of the expenditure and replenishment of the bodys resources contributes importantly to the overall physiological balance of bodily functions called homeostasis. Whereas the major controlling centers for somatic motor activity are the primary and secondary motor cortices in the frontal lobes and a variety of related subcortical nuclei, the major locus of central control in the visceral motor system is the hypothalamus and the complex circuitry that it controls in the brainstem reticular formation and spinal cord. The status of both principal divisions of the visceral motor system is modulated by descending pathways from these centers to preganglionic neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord, which in turn determine the activity of the primary visceral motor neurons in autonomic ganglia. The autonomic regulation of several organ systems of particular importance in clinical practice is considered in more detail as specific examples of visceral motor control.Although humans must always have been aware of involuntary motor reactions to stimuli in the environment, it was not until the late nineteenth century that the neural control of these and other visceral functions came to be understood in modern terms. The researchers who first rationalized the workings of the visceral motor system were Walter Gaskell and John Langley, two British physiologists at Cambridge University. Gaskell, whose work preceded that of Langley, established the overall anatomy of the system and carried out early physiological experiments that demonstrated some of its salient functional characteristics . Based on these and other observations, Gaskell concluded in 1866 that "every tissue is innervated by two sets of nerve fibers of opposite characters," and he further surmised that these actions showed "the characteristic signs of opposite chemical processes." Using similar electrical stimulation techniques in experimental animals, Langley went on to establish the function of autonomic ganglia, defined the terms "preganglionic" and "postganglionic", and coined the phrase autonomic nervous system. Langleys work on the pharmacology of the autonomic system initiated the classical studies indicating the roles of acetylcholine and the catecholamines in visceral motor function, and in neurotransmitter function more generally. In short, Langleys ingenious physiological and anatomical experiments established in detail the general proposition put forward by Gaskell on circumstantial grounds.The third major figure in the pioneering studies of the visceral motor system was Walter Cannon at Harvard Medical School, who during the early to mid-1900s devoted his career to understanding visceral motor functions in relation to homeostatic mechanisms generally, and to the emotions and higher brain functions in particular. Like Gaskell and Langley before him, this work was based primarily on electrical stimulation in experimental animals, but included activation of brainstem and other brain regions as well as the peripheral components of the system. He also established the effects of denervation in the visceral motor system, laying some of the basis for much further work on what is now referred to as "neuronal plasticity".Chapters 15 and 16 discussed in detail the organization of lower motor neurons in the central nervous system, their relationships to striated muscle fibers, and the means by which their activities are governed by higher motor centers. With respect to the efferent systems that govern the actions of smooth muscle fibers, cardiac muscle fibers, and glands, it is instructive to recognize the anatomical and functional features of the visceral motor system that distinguish it from the somatic motor system. First, although it is useful to recognize medial and lateral components of the somatic motor system, the anatomical and functional distinctions that justify this division of the somatic motor system are not nearly so great as they are for the three subsystems that comprise the visceral motor system. Second, the lower motor neurons of the visceral motor system are located outside of the central nervous system the cell bodies of primary visceral motor neurons are found in autonomic ganglia that are either close to the spinal cord or embedded in a neural plexus very near or in the target organ.Third, the contacts between visceral motor neurons and target tissues are much less differentiated than the neuromuscular junctions of the somatic motor system. Visceral motor axons tend to be highly branched and give rise to many synaptic terminals at varicosities along the length of the terminal axonal branch. Moreover, the surfaces of the target tissue usually lack the highly ordered structure of the motor endplates that characterizes postsynaptic target sites on striated muscle fibers. As a consequence, the neurotransmitters released by visceral motor terminals often diffuse for hundreds of microns before binding to postsynaptic receptors-a far greater distance than at the synaptic cleft of the somatic neuromuscular junction.Fourth, visceral motor terminals release a variety of neurotransmitters, including primary small-molecule neurotransmitters, and one or more of a variety of co-neurotransmitters that may be a different small-molecule type or a neuropeptide. These neurotransmitters in turn interact with a diverse set of postsynaptic receptors that mediate a myriad of postsynaptic effects in the target tissues. It should be clear, then, that while the major effect of somatic motor activation on striated muscle is nearly the same throughout the body, the effects of visceral motor activation are remarkably varied. This fact should come as no surprise, given the challenge of maintaining homeostasis across the many organ systems of the body in the face of variable environmental conditions and dynamic behavioral contingencies.Finally, whereas the principal actions of the somatic motor system are governed by motor cortical areas in the posterior frontal lobe, the activities of the visceral motor system are coordinated by a distributed set of cortical and subcortical structures in the ventral and medial parts of the forebrain collectively, these structures comprise a central autonomic network.In the remaining sections of this chapter, the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions and the enteric nervous system are separately considered. General principles of visceral motor control and the central and reflexive coordination of visceral motor and somatic motor activity are illustrated in more detail later in the chapter, in a discussion of specific autonomic reflexes related to cardiovascular control, urination, and sexual functioning.Activity of the neurons that make up the sympathetic division of the visceral motor system ultimately prepares individuals for "flight or fight," as Cannon famously put it. Cannon meant that, in extreme circumstances, heightened levels of sympathetic neural activity allow the body to make maximum use of its resources, thereby increasing the chances of survival or success in threatening or otherwise challenging situations. Thus, during high levels of sympathetic activity, the pupils dilate and the eyelids retract the blood vessels of the skin and gut constrict the hairs stand on end the bronchi dilate the heart rate accelerates and the force of cardiac contraction is enhanced and digestive and other vegetative functions become quiescent The neurons in the central nervous system that drive these effects are located in the spinal cord. They are arranged in a column of preganglionic   neurons that extends from the uppermost thoracic to the upper lumbar segments In addition to innervating the sympathetic chain ganglia, the preganglionic axons that govern the viscera extend a longer distance from the spinal cord in the splanchnic nerves to reach sympathetic ganglia that lie in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. These prevertebral ganglia include sympathetic ganglia in the cardiac plexus, the celiac ganglion, the superior and inferior mesenteric ganglia, and sympathetic ganglia in the pelvic plexus. The postganglionic axons arising from the prevertebral ganglia provide sympathetic innervation to the heart, lungs, gut, kidneys, pancreas, liver, bladder, and reproductive organs. Finally, a subset of thoracic preganglionic fibers in the splanchnic nerves innervate the adrenal medulla, which is generally regarded as a sympathetic ganglion modified for a specific endocrine function-namely, the release of catecholamines into the circulation to enhance a widespread sympathetic response to stress. In summary, sympathetic axons contribute to virtually all peripheral nerves, carrying innervation to an enormous range of targets Cannons memorable truism that the sympathetic activity prepares the animal for "fight or flight" notwithstanding, the sympathetic division of the visceral motor system is tonically active to maintain sympathetic target function at appropriate levels whatever the circumstances. Nor should the sympathetic system be thought of as responding in an all-or-none fashion many specific sympathetic reflexes operate more or less independently, as might be expected from the obvious need to specifically control various organ functions.In contrast to the sympathetic division, the preganglionic outflow from the central nervous system to the ganglia of the parasympathetic division stems from neurons whose distribution is limited to the brainstem and the sacral part of the spinal cord The sacral preganglionic innervation arises from neurons in the lateral gray matter of the sacral segments of the spinal cord, which are located in much the same position as the sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the intermediolateral column of the thoracic cord The parasympathetic ganglia innervated by preganglionic outflow from both cranial and sacral levels are in or near the end organs they serve. In this way they differ from the ganglionic targets of the sympathetic system The overall function of the parasympathetic system, as Gaskell, Langley, and later Cannon demonstrated, is generally opposite to that of the sympathetic system, serving to increase metabolic and other resources during periods when the animals circumstances allow it to "rest and digest." In contrast to the sympathetic functions enumerated earlier, the activity of the parasympathetic system constricts the pupils, slows the heart rate, and increases the peristaltic activity of the gut. At the same time, diminished activity in the sympathetic system allows the blood vessels of the skin and gut to dilate, the piloerector muscles to relax, and the outflow of catecholamines from the adrenal medulla to decrease.Although most organs do receive innervation from both the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the visceral motor system, some receive only sympathetic innervation. These exceptional targets include the sweat glands, the adrenal medulla, the piloerector muscles of the skin, and most arterial blood vessels An enormous number of neurons are specifically associated with the gastrointestinal tract to control its many functions indeed, more neurons are said to reside in the human gut than in the entire spinal cord. As already noted, the activity of the gut is modulated by both the sympathetic and the parasympathetic divisions of the visceral motor system. However, the gut also has an extensive system of nerve cells in its wall that do not fit neatly into the sympathetic or parasympathetic divisions of the visceral motor system As already mentioned, the preganglionic parasympathetic neurons that influence the gut are primarily in the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus nerve in the brainstem and the intermediate gray zone in the sacral spinal cord segments. The preganglionic sympathetic innervation that modulates the action of the gut plexuses derives from the thoraco-lumbar cord, primarily by way of the celiac, superior, and inferior mesenteric ganglia.Although the focus of this unit is "movement and its central control," it is also important to understand the sources of visceral sensory information and the means by which this input becomes intergrated in the central nervous system. Generally speaking, afferent activity arising from the viscera serves two important functions: it provides feedback input to local reflexes that modulate moment-to-moment visceral motor activity within individual organs and it serves to inform higher integrative centers of more complex patterns of stimulation that may signal potentially threatening conditions andor require the coordination of more widespread visceral motor, somatic motor, neuroendocrine, and behavioral activities The afferent fibers that provide this visceral sensory input arise from cell bodies that lie in the dorsal root ganglia and the sensory ganglia associated with the glossopharyngeal and vagus cranial nerves. However, there are far fewer visceral sensory neurons in comparison to mechanosensory neurons that innervate the skin and deeper somatic structures. This relative sparseness of peripheral visceral sensory innervation accounts in part for why most visceral sensations are diffuse and difficult to localize precisely.The spinal visceral sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglia send axons peripherally, through symapthetic nerves, ending in sensory receptor specializations such as nerve endings that are sensitive to pressure or stretch endings that innervate specialized chemosensitive cells or nociceptive endings that respond to damaging stretch, ischemia,