ligands also are transcriptional activators. The receptor for glucocorticoid hormones illustrates one mode of action of such receptors. In the absence of glucocorticoid hormones, the receptors are located in the cytoplasm. Binding of glucocorticoids causes the receptor to unfold and move to the nucleus, where it binds a specific recognition site on the DNA. This DNA binding activates the relevant RNA polymerase complex to initiate transcription and subsequent gene expression. Thus, a critical regulatory event for steroid receptors is their translocation to the nucleus to allow DNA binding.The receptors for thyroid hormone and other non-steroid nuclear receptors illustrate a second mode of regulation. In the absence of TH, the receptor is bound to DNA and serves as a potent repressor of transcription. Upon binding TH, the receptor undergoes a conformational change that ultimately opens the promoter for polymerase binding. Hence, TH binding switches the receptor from being a repressor to being an activator of transcription. c-fos. A different strategy of gene regulation is apparent in the function of the transcriptional activator protein, c-fos. In resting cells, c-fos is present at a very low concentration. However, stimulation of the target cell causes cfos to be synthesized, and the amount of this protein rises dramatically over 30-60 minutes. Therefore, c-fos is considered to be an immediate early gene because its synthesis is directly triggered by the stimulus. Once synthesized, c-fos protein can act as a transcriptional activator to induce synthesis of second-order genes. These are termed delayed response genes because their activity is delayed by the fact that an immediate early gene-c-fos in this case-needs to be activated first.Multiple signals converge on c-fos, activating different transcription factors that bind to at least three distinct sites in the promoter region of the gene. The regulatory region of the c-fos gene contains a binding site that mediates transcriptional induction by cytokines and ciliary neurotropic factor. Another site is targeted by growth factors such as neurotrophins through ras and protein kinase C, and a CRECaRE that can bind to CREB and thereby respond to cAMP or calcium entry resulting from electrical activity. In addition to synergistic interactions among these c-fos sites, transcriptional signals can be integrated by converging on the same activator, such as CREB.Nuclear signaling events typically result in the generation of a large and relatively stable complex composed of a functional transcriptional activator protein, additional proteins that bind to the activator protein, and the RNA polymerase and associated proteins bound at the start site of transcription. Most of the relevant signaling events act to "seed" this complex by generating an active transcriptional activator protein by phosphorylation, by inducing a conformational change in the activator upon ligand binding, by fostering nuclear localization, by removing an inhibitor, or simply by making more activator protein..12 Mechanism of action of NGF. NGF binds to a high-affinity tyrosine kinase receptor, TrkA, on the plasma membrane to induce phosphorylation of TrkA at two different tyrosine residues. These phosphorylated tyrosines serve to tether various adapter proteins or phospholipase C, which, in turn, activate three major signaling pathways: the PI 3 kinase pathway leading to activation of Akt kinase, the ras pathway leading to MAP kinases, and the PLC pathway leading to release of intracellular Ca 2 and activation of PKC. The ras and PLC pathways primarily stimulate processes responsible for neuronal differentiation, while the PI 3 kinase pathway is primarily involved in cell survival. NGFTrkA. The first of these is signaling by the nerve growth factor. This protein is a member of the neurotrophin growth factor family and is required for the differentiation, survival, and synaptic connectivity of sympathetic and sensory neurons  Long-term depression LTD is induced when PF synapses are activated at the same time as the glutamatergic climbing fiber synapses that also innervate Purkinje cells. The climbing fiber synapses produce large EPSPs that strongly depolarize the membrane potential of the Purkinje cell. This depolarization allows Ca 2 to enter the Purkinje cell via voltage-gated Ca 2 channels. When both synapses are simultaneously activated, the rise in intracellular Ca 2 concentration caused by the climbing fiber synapse enhances the sensitivity of IP 3 receptors to the IP 3 produced by PF synapses and allows the IP 3 receptors within the Purkinje cell to open. This releases Ca 2 from the endoplasmic reticulum and further elevates Ca 2 concentration locally near the PF synapses. This larger rise in Ca 2 , in conjunction with the DAG produced by the PF synapses, activates PKC. PKC in turn phosphorylates a number of substrate proteins. Ultimately, these signaling processes change AMPA-type receptors at the PF synapse, so that these receptors produce smaller electrical signals in response to the glutamate released from the PFs. This weakening of the PF synapse is the final cause of LTD.In short, transmission at Purkinje cell synapses produces brief electrical signals and chemical signals that last much longer. The temporal interplay between these signals allows LTD to occur only when both PF and climbing fiber synapses are active. The actions of IP 3 , DAG and Ca 2 also are restricted to small parts of the Purkinje cell dendrite, which is a more limited spatial range than the EPSPs, which spread throughout the entire dendrite and cell body of the Purkinje cell. Thus, in contrast to the electrical signals, the second messenger signals can impart precise information about the location of active synapses and allow LTD to occur only in the vicinity of active PFs. Phosphorylation of tyrosine hydroxylase. A third example of intracellular signaling in the nervous system is the regulation of the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase. Tyrosine hydroxylase governs the synthesis of the catecholamine neurotransmitters: dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. A number of signals, including electrical activity, other neurotransmitters, and NGF, increase the rate of catecholamine synthesis by increasing the catalytic activity of tyrosine hydroxylase Tyrosine hydroxylase is a substrate for several protein kinases, including PKA, CaMKII, MAP kinase, and PKC. Phosphorylation causes conformational changes that increase the catalytic activity of tyrosine hydroxylase. Stimuli that elevate cAMP, Ca 2 , or DAG can all increase tyrosine hydroxylase activity and thus increase the rate of catecholamine biosynthesis. This regulation by several different signals allows for close control of tyrosine hydroxylase activity, and illustrates how several different pathways can converge to influence a key enzyme involved in synaptic transmission.A diversity of signal transduction pathways exist within all neurons. Activation of these pathways typically is initiated by chemical signals such as neurotransmitters and hormones. These molecules bind to receptors that include ligand-gated ion channels, G-protein-coupled receptors and tyrosine kinase receptors. Many of these receptors activate either heterotrimeric or monomeric G-proteins that regulate intracellular enzyme cascades andor ion channels. A common outcome of the activation of these receptors is the production of second messengers, such as cAMP, Ca 2 , and IP 3 , that bind to effector enzymes. Particularly important effectors are protein kinases and phosphatases that regulate the phosphorylation state of their substrates, and thus their function. These substrates can be metabolic enzymes or other signal transduction molecules, such as ion channels, protein kinases, or transcription factors that regulate gene expression. Examples of transcription 14 Regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase by protein phosphorylation. This enzyme governs the synthesis of the catecholamine neurotransmitters and is stimulated by a number of intracellular signals. In the example shown here, neuronal electrical activity causes influx of Ca 2. The resultant rise in intracellular Ca 2 concentration activates protein kinases, which phosphorylates tyrosine hydroxylase to stimulate catecholamine synthesis. This, in turn, increases release of catecholamines  and, in some modalities the location of the stimulus in space. The clinical evaluation of patients routinely requires an assessment of the sensory systems to infer the nature and location of potential neurological problems. Knowledge of where and how the different sensory modalities are transduced, relayed, represented, and further processed to generate appropriate behavioral responses is therefore essential to understanding and treating a wide variety of diseases. Accordingly, these chapters on the neurobiology of sensation also introduce some of the major structurefunction relationships in the sensory components of the nervous system.The somatic sensory system has two major components: a subsystem for the detection of mechanical stimuli, and a subsystem for the detection of painful stimuli and temperature. Together, these two subsystems give humans and other animals the ability to identify the shapes and textures of objects, to monitor the internal and external forces acting on the body at any moment, and to detect potentially harmful circumstances. This chapter focuses on the mechanosensory subsystem the pain and temperature subsystem is taken up in the following chapter.Mechanosensory processing of external stimuli is initiated by the activation of a diverse population of cutaneous and subcutaneous mechanoreceptors at the body surface that relays information to the central nervous system for interpretation and ultimately action. Additional receptors located in muscles, joints, and other deep structures monitor mechanical forces generated by the musculoskeletal system and are called proprioceptors. Mechanosensory information is carried to the brain by several ascending pathways that run in parallel through the spinal cord, brainstem, and thalamus to reach the primary somatic sensory cortex in the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe. The primary somatic sensory cortex projects in turn to higher-order association cortices in the parietal lobe, and back to the subcortical structures involved in mechanosensory information processing.The specialized sensory receptors in the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissues are dauntingly diverse Despite their variety, all somatic sensory receptors work in fundamentally the same way: Stimuli applied to the skin deform or otherwise change theThe Somatic Sensory System nerve endings, which in turn affects the ionic permeability of the receptor cell membrane. Changes in permeability generate a depolarizing current in the nerve ending, thus producing a receptor potential that triggers action potentials, as described in Chapters 2 and 3. This overall process, in which the energy of a stimulus is converted into an electrical signal in the sensory neuron, is called sensory transduction and is the critical first step in all sensory processing.The quality of a mechanosensory stimulus is determined by the properties of the relevant receptors and the location of their central targets Four major types of encapsulated mechanoreceptors are specialized to provide information to the central nervous system about touch, pressure, vibration, and cutaneous tension: Meissners corpuscles, Pacinian corpuscles, Merkels disks, and Ruffinis corpuscles Pacinian corpuscles are large encapsulated endings located in the subcutaneous tissue. These receptors differ from Meissners corpuscles in their morphology, distribution, and response threshold. The Pacinian corpuscle has an onion-like capsule in which the inner core of membrane lamellae is separated from an outer lamella by a fluid-filled space. One or more rapidly adapting afferent axons lie at the center of this structure. The capsule again acts as a filter, in this case allowing only transient disturbances at high frequencies to activate the nerve endings. Pacinian corpuscles adapt more rapidly than Meissners corpuscles and have a lower response threshold. These attributes suggest that Pacinian corpuscles are involved in the discrimination of fine surface textures or other moving stimuli that produce high-frequency vibration of the skin. In corroboration of this supposition, stimulation of Pacinian corpuscle afferent fibers in humans induces a sensation of vibration or tickle. They make up 10-15% of the cutaneous receptors in the hand. Pacinian corpuscles located in interosseous membranes probably detect vibrations transmitted to the skeleton. Structurally similar endings found in the bills of ducks and geese and in the legs of cranes and herons detect vibrations in water such endings in the wings of soaring birds detect vibrations produced by air currents. Because they are rapidly adapting, Pacinian corpuscles, like Meissners corpuscles, provide information primarily about the dynamic qualities of mechanical stimuli.  Ruffinis corpuscles, although structurally similar to other tactile receptors, are not well understood. These elongated, spindle-shaped capsular specializations are located deep in the skin, as well as in ligaments and tendons. The long axis of the corpuscle is usually oriented parallel to the stretch lines in skin thus, Ruffinis corpuscles are particularly sensitive to the cutaneous stretching produced by digit or limb movements. They account for about 20% of the receptors in the human hand and do not elicit any particular tactile sensation when stimulated electrically. Although there is still some question as to their function, they probably respond primarily to internally generated stimuli.The accuracy with which tactile stimuli can be sensed varies from one region of the body to another, a phenomenon that illustrates some further principles  Two principles of somatiosensory organization have emerged from studies of the mammalian brain: individual neurons are tuned to particular aspects of complex stimuli and these stimulus qualities are represented in an orderly fashion in relevant regions of the nervous system. These principles apply equally well to invertebrates, including the equivalent of the somatic sensory system in insects such as crickets, grasshoppers, and cockroaches.In the cricket, the salient tactile stimulation for the animal comes from air currents that displace sensory hairs of bilaterally symmetric sensory structures called cerci. The location and structure of specific cercal hairs allow them to be displaced by air currents having different directions and speeds Individual neurons in this ganglion correspond to the cercal hairs, and have receptive fields and response properties that represent a full range of directions and speeds for extrinsic mechanical forces, including air currents Much like the somatic sensory system in mammals, the primary sensory afferents project to the terminal ganglion in an orderly fashion, such that there is a somatotopic map of air current directions. And, like mammals, individual neurons within this representation are tuned to specific aspects of the mechanical forces acting on the cricket.These facts about insects mechanosensory system emphasize that somatic sensory functions are basically similar across a wide range of animals. Indeed, regardless of sensory modality, nervous system organization, or the identity of the organism, it is likely that stimulus specificity will be reflected in receptive fields of individual neurons and there will be orderly mapping of those receptive fields into either a topographic or computational map in the animals brain.  When humans explore objects with their hands, multiple contacts between the skin and the object surface generate extraordinarily complex patterns of tactile stimuli. As a consequence, the somatic sensory system must process signals that change continuously in time. Nonetheless, we routinely discriminate the size, texture and shape of objects with great accuracy. Until recently, the temporal structure of such stimuli was not considered a major variable in characterizing the physiological properties of somatic sensory neurons. For instance, the classical definition of the receptive field of a somatic sensory neuron takes into account only the overall area of the body surface that elicits significant variation in the neurons firing rate. By the same token, the topographic maps in the somatic sensory system have been interpreted as evidence that tactile information processing involves primarily spatial criteria.The advent of multiple electrode recording to simultaneously monitor the activity of large populations of single neurons has begun to change this "static" view of the somatic sensory system. In both primates and rodents, this approach has shown that the receptive fields of cortical and subcortical neurons SI VPM SpV PrV Simultaneous electrode recordings in behaving rats allow monitoring of the spatiotemporal spread of neuronal activation across several levels of the somatic sensory system following stimulation. These 3-D graphs represent patterns of neuronal ensemble activity at each level of the pathway. The x axis represents the poststimulus time in ms, the y axis the number of neurons recorded at each level the color-coded gradient in the z axis shows the response of the neurons, with red the highest firing and green the lowest. SI, somatic sensory cortex VPM, ventral posterior medial nucleus of the thalamus SpV, spinal nucleus of the trigeminal brainstem complex PrV, principal nucleus of the brainstem trigeminal complex. Whereas cutaneous mechanoreceptors provide information derived from external stimuli, another major class of receptors provides information about mechanical forces arising from the body itself, the musculoskeletal system in particular. These are called proprioceptors, roughly meaning "receptors for self." The purpose of proprioceptors is primarily to give detailed and continuous information about the position of the limbs and other body parts inThe Somatic Sensor y System 197 vary as a function of time: The neuron responds differently to a spatially defined stimulus as the period of stimulation proceeds This coupling of space and time can also be demonstrated at level of somatotopic maps. By recording the activity of single neurons located in different regions of the map simultaneously, it is apparent that the stimulation of a small area of the skin tends to excite more and more neurons as time goes by. Thus, many more neurons than those located in the area of the map directly representing the stimulated skin actually respond to the stimulus, albeit at longer latencies. The end result of these more complex neuronal responses is the emergence of spatiotemporal representations at all levels of the somatic sensory system. Thus, contrary to the classical notion of receptive fields, the somatic sensory system processes information in a dynamic way. Such processing is not only relevant for the normal operation of the system, but may also account for some aspects of adult plasticity.  The density of spindles in human muscles varies. Large muscles that generate coarse movements have relatively few spindles in contrast, extraocular muscles and the intrinsic muscles of the hand and neck are richly supplied with spindles, reflecting the importance of accurate eye movements, the need to manipulate objects with great finesse, and the continuous demand for precise positioning of the head. This relationship between receptor den- Axon of a motor neuron sity and muscle size is consistent with the generalization that the sensory motor apparatus at all levels of the nervous system is much richer for the hands, head, speech organs, and other parts of the body that are used to perform especially important and demanding tasks. Spindles are lacking altogether in a few muscles, such as those of the middle ear, which do not require the kind of feedback that these receptors provide.Whereas muscle spindles are specialized to signal changes in muscle length, low-threshold mechanoreceptors in tendons inform the central nervous system about changes in muscle tension. These mechanoreceptors, called Golgi tendon organs, are innervated by branches of group Ib afferents and are distributed among the collagen fibers that form the tendons.Finally, rapidly adapting mechanoreceptors in and around joints gather dynamic information about limb position and joint movement. The function of these joint receptors is not well understood.Tactile discrimination-that is, perceiving the detailed shape or texture of an object-normally entails active exploration. In humans, this is typically accomplished by using the hands to grasp and manipulate objects, or by moving the fingers across a surface so that a sequence of contacts between the skin and the object of interest is established. Psychophysical evidence indicates that relative movement between the skin and a surface is the single most important requirement for accurate discrimination of texture. Animal experiments confirm the dependence of tactile discrimination on active exploration. Rats, for instance, discriminate the details of texture by rhythmically brushing their facial whiskers across surfaces. Active touching, which is called haptics, involves the interpretation of complex spatiotemporal patterns of stimuli that are likely to activate many classes of mechanoreceptors. Haptics also requires dynamic interactions between motor and sensory signals, which presumably induce sensory responses in central neurons that differ from the responses of the same cells during passive stimulation of the skin.The action potentials generated by tactile and other mechanosensory stimuli are transmitted to the spinal cord by afferent sensory axons traveling in the peripheral nerves. The neuronal cell bodies that give rise to these first-order axons are located in the dorsal root ganglia associated with each segmental spinal nerve Depending on whether they belong to the mechanosensory system or to the pain and temperature system, the first-order axons carrying information from somatic receptors have different patterns of termination in the spinal cord and define distinct somatic sensory pathways within the central nervous system Upon entering the spinal cord, the first-order axons carrying information from peripheral mechanoreceptors bifurcate into ascending and descending branches, which in turn send collateral branches to several spinal segments. Some collateral branches penetrate the dorsal horn of the cord and synapse on neurons located mainly in a region called Rexeds laminae III-V. These synapses mediate, among other things, segmental reflexes such as the "kneejerk" or myotatic reflex described in Chapter 1, and are further considered in Chapters 15 and 16. The major branch of the incoming axons, however, ascends ipsilaterally through the dorsal columns of the cord, all the way to the lower medulla, where it terminates by contacting second-order neurons in the gracile and cuneate nuclei. Axons in the dorsal columns are topographically organized such that the fibers that convey information from lower limbs are in the medial subdivision of the dorsal columns, called the gracile tract, a fact of some significance in the clinical localization of neural injury. The lateral subdivision, called the cuneate tract, contains axons conveying information from the upper limbs, trunk, and neck. At the level of the upper thorax, the dorsal columns account for more than a third of the cross-sectional area of the human spinal cord.Despite their size, lesions limited to the dorsal columns of the spinal cord in both humans and monkeys have only a modest effect on the performance of simple tactile tasks. Such lesions, however, do impede the ability to detect the direction and speed of tactile stimuli, as well as degrading the ability to sense the position of the limbs in space. Dorsal column lesions may also reduce a patients ability to initiate active movements related to tactile exploration. For instance, such individuals have difficulty recognizing numbers and letters drawn on their skin. The relatively mild deficit that follows dorsal column lesions is presumably explained by the fact that some axons responsible for cutaneous mechanoreception also run in the spinothalamic pathway, as described in Chapter 9.The second-order relay neurons in the dorsal column nuclei send their axons to the somatic sensory portion of the thalamus In a cross-section through the medulla, such as the one shown in niscus thus reach the ventral posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus, whose cells are the third-order neurons of the dorsal column-medial lemniscus system As noted, the dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway described in the preceding section carries somatic information from only the upper and lower body and from the posterior third of the head. Tactile and propriocepEach dorsal root ganglion and associated spinal nerve arises from an iterated series of embryonic tissue masses called somites. This fact of development explains the overall segmental arrangement of somatic nerves in the adult The trigeminal complex has two major components: the principal nucleus, and the spinal nucleus. Thus, most of the axons carrying information from low-threshold cutaneous mechanoreceptors in the face terminate in the principal nucleus. In effect, this nucleus corresponds to the dorsal column nuclei that relay mechanosensory information from the rest of the body. The spinal nucleus corresponds to a portion of the spinal cord that contains the second-order neurons in the pain and temperature system for the rest of the body. The secondorder neurons of the trigeminal brainstem nuclei give off axons that cross the midline and ascend to the ventral posterior medial nucleus of the thalamus by way of the trigeminothalamic tract.Each of the several ascending somatic sensory pathways originating in the spinal cord and brainstem converge on the thalamus The axons arising from neurons in the ventral posterior complex of the thalamus project to cortical neurons located primarily in layer IV of the somatic sensory cortex Although the topographic organization of the several somatic sensory areas is similar, the functional properties of the neurons in each region and their organization are distinct. For instance, the neuronal receptive fields are relatively simple in area 3b the responses elicited in this region are generally to stimulation of a single finger. In areas 1 and 2, however, the majority of the receptive fields respond to stimulation of multiple fingers. Furthermore, neurons in area 1 respond preferentially to particular directions of skin stimulation, whereas many area 2 neurons require complex stimuli to activate them. Lesions restricted to area 3b produce a severe deficit in both texture and shape discrimination. In contrast, damage confined to area 1 affects the ability of monkeys to perform accurate texture discrimination. Area 2 lesions tend to produce deficits in finger coordination, and in shape and size discrimination.A salient feature of cortical maps, recognized soon after their discovery, is their failure to represent the body in actual proportion. When neurosurgeons determined the representation of the human body in the primary sensory cortex, the homunculus defined by such mapping procedures had a grossly enlarged face and hands compared to the torso and proximal limbs Somatic sensory information is distributed from the primary somatic sensory cortex to "higher-order" cortical fields.One of these higher-order cortical centers, the secondary somatosensory cortex This wealth of evidence for such patterned circuits has led many neuroscientists to conclude, like Mountcastle, that modules are a fundamental feature of the cerebral cortex, essential for perception, cognition, and perhaps even consciousness. Despite the prevalence of iterated modules, there are some problems with the view that modular units are universally important in cortical function. First, although modular circuits of a given class are readily seen in the brains of some species, they have not been found in the same brain regions of other, sometimes closely related, animals. Second, not all regions of the mammalian cortex are organized in a modular fashion. And third, no clear function of such modules has been discerned, much effort and speculation notwithstanding. This salient feature of the organization of the somatic sensory cortex and other cortical regions therefore remains a tantalizing puzzle.  The components of the somatic sensory system considered in this chapter process information conveyed by mechanical stimuli that impinge upon the body surface or that are generated within the body itself. This processing is performed by neurons distributed across several brain structures that are connected by both ascending and descending pathways. Transmission of afferent mechanosensory information from the periphery to the brain begins with a variety of receptor types that initiate action potentials. This activity is conveyed centrally via a chain of neurons, referred to as the first-, second-, and third-order cells. First-order neurons are located in the dorsal root and cranial nerve ganglia. Second-order neurons are located in brainstem nuclei. Third-order neurons are found in the thalamus, from whence they project to the cerebral cortex. These pathways are topographically arranged throughout the system, the amount of cortical and subcortical space allocated to various body parts being proportional to the density of peripheral receptors. Studies of non-human primates show that specific cortical regions correspond to each functional submodality area 3b, for example, processes information from low-threshold cutaneous receptors, and area 3a from proprioceptors. Thus, at least two broad criteria operate in the organization of the somatic sensory system: modality and somatotopy. The end result of this complex interaction is the unified perceptual representation of the body and its ongoing interaction with the environment.A natural assumption is that the sensation of pain arises from excessive stimulation of the same receptors that generate other somatic sensations. This is not the case. Although similar in some ways to the sensory processing of ordinary mechanical stimulation, the perception of pain, called nociception, depends on specifically dedicated receptors and pathways. Since alerting the brain to the dangers implied by noxious stimuli differs substantially from informing it about innocuous somatic sensory stimuli, it makes good sense that a special subsystem be devoted to the perception of potentially threatening circumstances. The overriding importance of pain in clinical practice, as well as the many aspects of pain physiology and pharmacology that remain imperfectly understood, continue to make nociception an extremely active area of research.The relatively unspecialized nerve cell endings that initiate the sensation of pain are called nociceptors. Like other cutaneous and subcutaneous receptors, they transduce a variety of stimuli into receptor potentials, which in turn trigger afferent action potentials Because peripheral nociceptive axons terminate in unspecialized "free endings," it is conventional to categorize nociceptors according to the properties of the axons associated with them In general, the faster-conducting A nociceptors respond either to dangerously intense mechanical or to mechanothermal stimuli, and have receptive fields that consist of clusters of sensitive spots. Other unmyelinated nociceptors tend to respond to thermal, mechanical, and chemical stimuli, and are209 Pain therefore said to be polymodal. In short, there are three major classes of nociceptors in the skin: A mechanosensitive nociceptors A mechanothermal nociceptors and polymodal nociceptors, the latter being specifically associated with C fibers. The receptive fields of all pain-sensitive neurons are relatively large, particularly at the level of the thalamus and cortex, presumably because the detection of pain is more important than its precise localization.Studies carried out in both humans and experimental animals demonstrated some time ago that the rapidly conducting axons that subserve somatic sensory sensation are not involved in the transmission of pain. A typical experiment of this sort is illustrated in How, then, do these different classes of nociceptors lead to the perception of pain As mentioned, one way of determining the answer has been to stimulate different nociceptors in human volunteers while noting the sensations reported. In general, two categories of pain perception have been described: a sharp first pain and a more delayed, diffuse, and longer-lasting sensation that is generally called second pain Given the variety of stimuli that can give rise to painful sensations, the transduction of nociceptive signals is a complex task. While many puzzles remain, some insights have come from the identification of specific receptors associated with nociceptive afferent endings. These receptors are sensitive to both heat and to capsaicin, the ingredient in chili peppers that is responsible for the familiar tingling or burning sensation produced by spicy foods. The so-called vanilloid receptor is found in C and A fibers and is activated by moderate heat as well as by capsaicin. Another type of receptor has a higher threshold response to heat, is not sensitive to capsaicin, and is found in A fibers. Both are members of the larger family of transient receptor potential channels, first identified in studies of the phototransduction pathway in fruit flies and now known to comprise a large number of receptors sensitive to different ranges of heat and cold. Structurally, TRP channels resemble voltage-gated potassium or cyclic nucleotide-gated channels, having six transmembrane domains with a pore between domains 5 and 6. Under resting conditions the pore of the channel is closed. In the open, activated state, these receptors allow an influx of sodium and calcium that initiates the generation of action potentials in the nociceptive fibers.Since the same receptor is responsive to heat as well as capsaicin, it is not surprising that chili peppers seem "hot." A puzzle, however, is why the nervous system has evolved receptors that are sensitive to a chemical in chili peppers. As with the case of other plant compounds that selectively activate neural receptors, it seems likely that TRPV1 receptors detect endogenous substances whose chemical structure resembles that of capsaicin. In fact, there is now some evidence that endovanilloids that are produced by peripheral tissues in response to injury, Capsaicin, the principle ingredient responsible for the pungency of hot peppers, is eaten daily by over a third of the worlds population. Capsaicin activates responses in a subset of nociceptive C fibers by opening ligand-gated ion channels that permit the entry of Na  and Ca 2 . One of these channels has been cloned and has been found to be activated by capsaicin, acid, and anandamide, and by heating the tissue to about 43C. It follows that anandamide and temperature are probably the endogenous activators of these channels. Mice whose VR-1 receptors have been knocked out drink capsaicin solutions as if they were water. Receptors for capsaicin have been found in polymodal nociceptors of all mammals, but are not present in birds. When applied to the mucus membranes of the oral cavity, capsaicin acts as an irritant, producing protective reactions. When injected into skin, it produces a burning pain and elicits hyperalgesia to thermal and mechanical stimuli. Repeated applications of capsaicin also desensitize pain fibers and prevent neuromodulators such as substance P, VIP, and somatostatin from being released by peripheral and central nerve terminals. Consequently, capsaicin is used clinically as an analgesic and anti-inflammatory agent it is usually applied topically in a cream to relieve the pain associated with arthritis, postherpetic neuralgia, mastectomy, and trigeminal neuralgia. Thus, this remarkable chemical irritant not only gives gustatory pleasure on an enormous scale, but is also a useful pain reliever and that these substances, along with other factors, contribute to the nocieceptive response to injury.The pathways that carry information about noxious stimuli to the brain, as might be expected for such an important and multifaceted system, are also complex. It helps in understanding this complexity to distinguish two components of pain: the sensory discriminative component, which signals the location, intensity, and quality of the noxious stimululation, and the affective-motivational component of pain-which signals the unpleasant quality of the experience, and enables the autonomic activation that follows a noxious stimulus. The discriminative component is thought to depend on pathways that target the traditional somatosensory areas of cortex, while the affective-motivational component is thought to depend on additional cortical and brainstem pathways. The major pathways are summarized in The axons of these second-order neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord cross the midline and ascend all the way to the brainstem and thalamus in the anterolateral quadrant of the contralateral half of the spinal cord. These fibers form the spinothalamic tract, the major ascending pathway for information about pain and temperature. This overall pathway is also referred to as the anterolateral system, much as the mechanosensory pathway is referred to as the dorsal column-medial lemniscus system.The location of the spinothalamic tract is particularly important clinically because of the characteristic sensory deficits that follow certain spinal cord injuries. Since the mechanosensory pathway ascends ipsilaterally in the cord, a unilateral spinal lesion will produce sensory loss of touch, pressure, vibration, and proprioception below the lesion on the same side. The pathways for pain and temperature, however, cross the midline to ascend on the opposite side of the cord. Therefore, diminished sensation of pain below the lesion will be observed on the side opposite the mechanosensory loss. This pattern is referred to as a dissociated sensory loss and helps define the level of the lesion As is the case of the mechanosensory pathway, information about noxious and thermal stimulation of the face follows a separate route to the thalamus Surprisingly, there are few, if any, neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord that are specialized solely for the transmission of visceral pain. Obviously, we recognize such pain, but it is conveyed centrally via dorsal horn neurons that are also concerned with cutaneous pain. As a result of this economical arrangement, the disorder of an internal organ is sometimes perceived as cutaneous pain. A patient may therefore present to the physician with the complaint of pain at a site other than its actual source, a potentially confusing phenomenon called referred pain. The most common clinical example is anginal pain referred to the upper chest wall, with radiation into the left arm and hand.Other important examples are gallbladder pain referred to the scapular region, esophogeal pain referred to the chest wall, ureteral pain referred to the lower abdominal wall, bladder pain referred to the perineum, and the pain from an inflamed appendix referred to the anterior abdominal wall around the umbilicus. Understanding referred pain can lead to an astute diagnosis that might otherwise be missed.entering the pons, these small myelinated and unmyelinated trigeminal fibers descend to the medulla, forming the spinal trigeminal tract, and terminate in two subdivisions of the spinal trigeminal complex: the pars interpolaris and pars caudalis. Axons from the second-order neurons in these two trigeminal nuclei, like their counterparts in the spinal cord, cross the midline and ascend to the contralateral thalamus in the trigeminothalamic tract. The principal target of the spinothalamic and trigeminothalamic pathway is the ventral posterior nucleus of the thalamus. Similar to the organization of the mechanosensory pathways, information from the body terminates in the VPL, while information from the face terminate in the VPM. These nuclei send their axons to primary and secondary somatosensory cortex. The nociceptive information transmitted to these cortical areas is thought to be responsible for the discriminative component of pain: identifying the location, the intensity, and quality of the stimulation. Consistent with this interpretation, electrophysiological recordings from nociceptive neurons in S1, show that these neurons have small localized receptive fields, properties commensurate with behavioral measures of pain localization.The affective-motivational aspect of pain is evidently mediated by separate projections of the anterolateral system to the reticular formation of the midbrain, and to thalamic nuclei that lie medial to the ventral posterior nucleus Projections from the anterolateral system to the medial thalamic nuclei provide nociceptive signals to areas in the frontal lobe, the insula and the cingulate cortex From this description, it should be evident that the full experience of pain involves the cooperative action of an extensive network of brain regions whose properties are only beginning to be understood. The cortical  Chapters 8 and 9 present a framework for considering the central neural pathways that convey innocuous mechanosensory signals and painful signals from cutaneous and deep somatic sources. Considering just the signals derived from the body below the head, discriminitive mechanosensory and proprioceptive information travels to the ventral posterior thalamus via the dorsal-column medial lemniscal system The answer is via a newly discovered component of the dorsal column medial lemniscal pathway that conveys visceral nociception. Although Chapter 20 will present more information on the systems that receive and process visceral sensory information, at this juncture it is worth considering this component of the pain pathways and how this particular pathway has begun to impact clinical medicine.Primary visceral afferents from the pelvic and abdominal viscera enter the spinal cord and synapse on second-order neurons in the dorsal horn of the lumbar-sacral spinal cord. As discussed in Box A and Chapter 20, some of these second-order neurons are cells that give rise to the anterolateral systems and contribute to referred visceral pain patterns. However, other neurons-perhaps primarily those that give rise to nociceptive signals-synapse upon neurons in the intermediate gray region of the spinal cord near the central canal. These neurons, in turn, send their axons not through the anterolateral white matter of the spinal cord but through the dorsal columns in a position very near the midline This dorsal column visceral sensory projection now appears to be the principal pathway by which painful sensations arising in the viscera are detected and discriminated. Several observations support this conclusion: neurons in the ventral posterior lateral nucleus, nucleus gracilis and near the central canal of the spinal cord all respond to noxious visceral stimulation responses of neurons in the ventral posterior lateral nucleus and nucleus gracilis to such stimulation are greatly reduced by spinal lesions of the dorsal columns The discovery of this visceral sensory component in the dorsal-column medial lemniscal system has helped to explain why surgical transection of the axons that run in the medial part of the dorsal columns generates significant relief from the debilitating pain that can result from visceral cancers in the abdomen and pelvis. Although the initial development of this surgical procedure preceded the elucidation of this visceral pain pathway, these new discoveries have renewed interest in midline myelotomy as a palliative neurosurgical intervention for cancer patients whose pain is otherwise unmanageable. Indeed, precise knowledge of the visceral sensory pathway in the dorsal columns has led to further refinements that permit a minimally invasive surgical procedure that attempts to interupt the secondorder axons of this pathway within just a single spinal segment Following a painful stimulus associated with tissue damage, , stimuli in the area of the injury and the surrounding region that would ordinarily be perceived as slightly painful are perceived as significantly more so, a phenomenon referred to as hyperalgesia. A good example of hyperalgesia is the increased sensitivity to temperature that occurs after a sunburn. This effect is due to changes in neuronal sensitivity that occur at the level of peripheral receptors as well as their central targets.Peripheral sensitization results from the interaction of nociceptors with the "inflammatory soup" Central sensitization refers to an immediate onset, activity dependent increase in the excitability of neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord following high levels of activity in the nociceptive afferents. As a result, activity levels in nociceptive afferents that were subthreshold prior to the sensitizing event, become sufficient to generate action potentials in dorsal horn neurons, contributing to an increase in pain sensitivity. Although central sensitization is triggered in dorsal horn neurons by activity in nociceptors, the effects generalize to other inputs that arise from low threshold mechanoreceptors. Thus, stimuli that under normal conditions would be innocuous activate second-order neurons in the dorsal horn that receive nociceptive inputs, and give rise to a sensation of pain. The induction of pain by what is normally an innocuous stimulus is referred to as allodynia. This phenomenon typically occurs immediately after the painful event and can outlast the stimulus by several hours.Like its peripheral counterpart, a number of different mechanisms contribute to central sensitization, and these can be divided broadly into transcription independent and dependent processes. One form of transcription independent central sensitization called "windup" involves a progressive increase in the discharge rate of dorsal horn neurons in response to repeated low frequency activation of nociceptive afferents. A behavioral correlate of the windup phenomenon has been studied by examining the perceived intensity of pain in response to multiple presentations of a noxious stimulus. Although the intensity of the stimulation is constant, the perceived intensity increases with each stimulus presentation. Windup lasts only during the period of stimulation and arises from the summation of the slow synaptic potentials that are evoked in dorsal horn neurons by nociceptive inputs. The sustained depolarization of the dorsal horn neurons results in part from the activation of voltage dependent L-type calcium channels, and from the removal of the Mg block of NMDA receptors, increasing the sensitivity of the the dorsal horn neuron to glutamate, the transmitter in nociceptive afferents. Other forms of central sensitization that last longer than the period of sensory stimulation are thought to involve an LTP-like enhancement of postsynaptic potentials. The longest lasting forms, resulting from transcription dependent processes, can be elicited by changes in neuronal activity or by humoral signals. Those elicited by neuronal activity are localized to the site of the injury, while humoral activation can lead to more widespread changes. For example, cytokines released from microglia and from other sources promote the widespread transcription of COX-2 and the production of prostaglandins in dorsal horn neurons. As described for nociceptive afferents, increased levels of prostaglandins in CNS neurons augments neuronal excitability. Thus the analgesic effects of drugs that inhibit COX are due to actions in both the periphery and within the dorsal horn.As injured tissue heals, the sensitization induced by peripheral and central mechanisms typically declines and the theshold for pain returns to Following the amputation of an extremity, nearly all patients have an illusion that the missing limb is still present. Although this illusion usually diminishes over time, it persists in some degree throughout the amputees life and can often be reactivated by injury to the stump or other perturbations. Such phantom sensations are not limited to amputated limbs phantom breasts following mastectomy, phantom genitalia following castration, and phantoms of the entire lower body following spinal cord transection have all been reported. Phantoms are also common after local nerve block for surgery. During recovery from brachial plexus anesthesia, for example, it is not unusual for the patient to experience a phantom arm, perceived as whole and intact, but displaced from the real arm. When the real arm is viewed, the phantom appears to "jump into" the arm and may emerge and reenter intermittently as the anesthesia wears off. These sensory phantoms demonstrate that the central machinery for processing somatic sensory information is not idle in the absence of peripheral stimuli apparently, the central sensory processing apparatus continues to operate independently of the periphery, giving rise to these bizarre sensations.Interestingly, considerable functional reorganization of somatotopic maps in the primary somatosensory cortex occurs in amputees. This reorganization starts immediately after the amputation and tends to evolve for several years. One of the effects of this process is that neurons that have lost their original inputs respond to tactile stimulation of other body parts. A surprising consequence is that stimulation of the face, for example, can be experienced as if the missing limb had been touched.Further evidence that the phenomenon of phantom limb is the result of a central representation is the experience of children born without limbs. Such individuals have rich phantom sensations, despite the fact that a limb never developed. This observation suggests that a full represenation of the body exists independently of the peripheral elements that are mapped. Based on these results, Ronald Melzack proposed that the loss of a limb generates an internal mismatch between the brains representation of the body and the pattern of peripheral tactile input that reaches the neocortex. The consequence would be an illusory sensation that the missing body part is still present and functional. With time, the brain may adapt to this loss and alter its intrinsic somatic representation to better accord with the new configuration of the body. This change could explain why the phantom sensation appears almost immediately after limb loss, but usually decreases in intensity over time.Phantoms might simply be a curiosity-or a provocative clue about higherorder somatic sensory processing-were it not for the fact that a substantial number of amputees also develop phantom pain. This common problem is usually described as a tingling or burning sensation in the missing part. Sometimes, however, the sensation becomes a more seriBox D Phantom Limbs and Phantom Pain preinjury levels. However, when the afferent fibers or central pathways themselves are damaged-a frequent complication in pathological conditions that include diabetes, shingles, AIDs, multiple sclerosis, and strokethese processes can persist. The resulting condition is refered to as neuropathic pain, a chronic, intensely painful experience that is difficult to treat with conventional analgesic medications. The pain can arise spontaneously or can be produced by mild forms of stimulation that are common to everyday experience, such as the gentle touch and pressure of clothing, or warm and cool temperatures. Patients often describe their experience as a constant burning sensation interrupted by episodes of shooting, stabbing, or electric shocklike jolts. Because the disability and psychological stress associated with chronic neuropathic pain can be severe, much present research is being devoted to better understanding of the mechanisms of peripheral and central sensitization with the hope of more effective therapies for this debilitating syndrome.ous pain that patients find increasingly debilitating. Phantom pain is, in fact, one of the more common causes of chronic pain syndromes and is extraordinarily difficult to treat. Because of the widespread nature of central pain processing, ablation of the spinothalamic tract, portions of the thalamus, or even primary sensory cortex does not generally relieve the discomfort felt by these patients.With respect to the interpretation of pain, observers have long commented on the difference between the objective reality of a painful stimulus and the subjective response to it. Modern studies of this discrepancy have provided considerable insight into how circumstances affect pain perception and, ultimately, into the anatomy and pharmacology of the pain system. During World War II, Henry Beecher and his colleagues at Harvard Medical School made a fundamental observation. In the first systematic study of its kind, they found that soldiers suffering from severe battle wounds often experienced little or no pain. Indeed, many of the wounded expressed surprise at this odd dissociation. Beecher, an anesthesiologist, concluded that the perception of pain depends on its context. For instance, the pain of an injured soldier on the battlefield would presumably be mitigated by the imagined benefits of being removed from danger, whereas a similar injury in a domestic setting would present quite a different set of circumstances that could exacerbate the pain. Such observations, together with the well-known placebo effect, make clear that the perception of pain is subject to central modulation. This statement, incidentally, should not be taken as a vague acknowledgment about the importance of psychological or "topdown" influences on sensory experience. On the contrary, there has been a gradual realization among neuroscientists and neurologists that such "psychological" effects are as real and important as any other neural phenomenon. This appreciation has provided a much more rational view of psychosomatic problems in general, and pain in particular.The placebo effect is defined as a physiological response following the administration of a pharmacologically inert "remedy." The word placebo means "I will please," and the placebo effect has a long history of use in medicine. The reality of the effect is undisputed. In one classic study, medical students were given one of two different pills, one said to be a sedative and the other a stimulant. In fact, both pills contained only inert ingredients. Of the students who received the "sedative," more than twothirds reported that they felt drowsy, and students who took two such pills felt sleepier than those who had taken only one. Conversely, a large fraction of the students who took the "stimulant" reported that they felt less tired. Moreover, about a third of the entire group reported side effects ranging from headaches and dizziness to tingling extremities and a staggering gait Only 3 of the 56 students studied reported that the pills they took had no appreciable effect.In another study of this general sort, 75% of patients suffering from postoperative wound pain reported satisfactory relief after an injection of sterile saline. The researchers who carried out this work noted that the responders were indistinguishable from the nonresponders, both in the apparent severity of their pain and psychological makeup. Most tellingly, this placebo effect in postoperative patients could be blocked by naloxone, a competitive antagonist of opiate receptors, indicating a substantial pharmacological basis for the pain relief experienced. A common misunderstanding about the placebo effect is the view that patients who respond to a therapeutically meaningless reagent are not suffering real pain, but only "imagining" it this is certainly not the case.Among other things, the placebo effect probably explains the efficacy of acupuncture anesthesia and the analgesia that can sometimes be achieved by hypnosis. In China, surgery has often been carried out under the effect of a needle inserted at locations dictated by ancient acupuncture charts. Before the advent of modern anesthetic techniques, operations such as thyroidectomies for goiter were commonly done without extraordinary discomfort, particularly among populations where stoicism was the cultural norm.The mechanisms of pain amelioration on the battlefield, in acupuncture anesthesia, and with hypnosis are presumably related. Although the mechanisms by which the brain affects the perception of pain are only beginning to be understood, the effect is neither magical nor a sign of a suggestible intellect. In short, the placebo effect is quite real.Understanding the central modulation of pain perception was greatly advanced by the finding that electrical or pharmacological stimulation of certain regions of the midbrain produces relief of pain. This analgesic effect arises from activation of descending pain-modulating pathways that project to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and regulate the transmission of information to higher centers Further studies of descending pathways to the spinal cord that regulate the transmission of nociceptive information have shown that they arise from a number of brainstem sites, including the parabrachial nucleus, the dorsal raphe, and locus coeruleus and the medullary reticular formation In addition to descending projections, local interactions between mechanoreceptive afferents and neural circuits within the dorsal horn can modulate the transmission of nociceptive information to higher centers The most exciting advance in this long-standing effort to understand central mechanisms of pain regulation has been the discovery of endogenous opioids. For centuries it had been apparent that opium derivatives such as morphine are powerful analgesics-indeed, they remain a mainstay of analgesic therapy today. Modern animal studies have shown that a variety of brain regions are susceptible to the action of opiate drugs, particularly-and significantly-the periaqueductal gray matter and other sources of descend- ing projections. There are, in addition, opiate-sensitive neurons within the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. In other words, the areas that produce analgesia when stimulated are also responsive to exogenously administered opiates. It seems likely, then, that opiate drugs act at most or all of the sites shown in One of the most compelling examples of the mechanism by which endogenous opiates modulate transmission of nociceptive information occurs at the first synapse in the pain pathway between nociceptive afferents and projection neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord A particularly impressive aspect of this story is the wedding of physiology, pharmacology, and clinical research to yield a much richer understanding of the intrinsic modulation of pain. This information has finally begun to explain the subjective variability of painful stimuli and the striking dependence of pain perception on the context of the experience. Precisely how pain is modulated is being explored in many laboratories at present, motivated by the tremendous clinical benefits that would accrue from still deeper knowledge of the pain system and its molecular underpinnings.Whether from a structural or functional perspective, pain is an extraordinarily complex sensory modality. Because of the importance of warning an animal about dangerous circumstances, the mechanisms and pathways that subserve nociception are widespread and redundant. A distinct set of pain afferents with membrane receptors known as nociceptors transduces noxious stimulation and conveys this information to neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. The major central pathway responsible for transmitting the discriminative aspects of pain differs from the mechanosensory pathway primarily in that the central axons of dorsal root ganglion cells synapse on second-order neurons in the dorsal horn the axons of the second-order neurons then cross the midline in the spinal cord and ascend to thalamic nuclei that relay information to the somatic sensory cortex of the postcentral gyrus. Additional pathways involving a number of centers in the brainstem, thalamus, and cortex mediate the affective and motivational responses to painful stimuli. Descending pathways interact with local circuits in the spinal cord to regulate the transmission of nociceptive signals to higher centers. Tremendous progress in understanding pain has been made in the last 25 years, and much more seems likely, given the importance of the problem. No patients are more distressed-or more difficult to treat-than those with chronic pain. Indeed, some aspects of pain seem much more destructive to the sufferer than required by any physiological purposes. Perhaps such seemingly excessive effects are a necessary but unfortunate by-product of the protective benefits of this vital sensory modality.The human visual system is extraordinary in the quantity and quality of information it supplies about the world. A glance is sufficient to describe the location, size, shape, color, and texture of objects and, if the objects are moving, their direction and speed. Equally remarkable is the fact that visual information can be discerned over a wide range of stimulus intensities, from the faint light of stars at night to bright sunlight. The next two chapters describe the molecular, cellular, and higher-order mechanisms that allow us to see. The first steps in the process of seeing involve transmission and refraction of light by the optics of the eye, the transduction of light energy into electrical signals by photoreceptors, and the refinement of these signals by synaptic interactions within the neural circuits of the retina.The eye is a fluid-filled sphere enclosed by three layers of tissue Beyond the cornea, light rays pass through two distinct fluid environments before striking the retina. In the anterior chamber, just behind the cornea and in front of the lens, lies aqueous humor, a clear, watery liquid that supplies nutrients to both of these structures. Aqueous humor is produced by the ciliary processes in the posterior chamber  and flows into the anterior chamber through the pupil. The amount of fluid produced by the ciliary processes is substantial: it is estimated that the entire volume of fluid in the anterior chamber is replaced 12 times a day. Thus the rates of a aqueous humor production must be balanced by comparable rates of drainage from the anterior chamber in order to ensure a constant intraocular pressure. A specialized meshwork of cells that lies at the junction of the iris and the cornea is responsible for aqueous drainage. Failure of adequate drainage results in a disorder known as glaucoma, in which high levels of intraocular pressure can reduce the blood supply to the eye and eventually damage retinal neurons.The space between the back of the lens and the surface of the retina is filled with a thick, gelatinous substance called the vitreous humor, which accounts for about 80% of the volume of the eye. In addition to maintaining the shape of the eye, the vitreous humor contains phagocytic cells that remove blood and other debris that might otherwise interfere with light transmission. The housekeeping abilities of the vitreous humor are limited, however, as a large number of middle-aged and elderly individuals with vitreal "floaters" will attest. Floaters are collections of debris too large for phagocytic consumption that therefore remain to cast annoying shadows on the retina they typically arise when the aging vitreous membrane pulls away from the overly long eyeball of myopic individuals. 