.11 Descending projections from the medial and lateral vestibular nuclei to the spinal cord underlie the VCR and VSR. The medial vestibular nuclei project bilaterally in the medial longitudinal fasciculus to reach the medial part of the ventral horns and mediate head reflexes in response to activation of semicircular canals. The lateral vestibular nucleus sends axons via the lateral vestibular tract to contact anterior horn cells innervating the axial and proximal limb muscles. Neurons in the lateral vestibular nucleus receive input from the cerebellum, allowing the cerebellum to influence posture and equilibrium.sensations A primary function of the vestibular system is to provide information about the direction and speed of ongoing movements, ultimately enabling rapid, coordinated reflexes to compensate for both self-induced and externally generated forces. One of the most impressive and speediest vestibular-mediated reflexes is the tail-flip escape behavior of fish, a stereotyped response that allows a potential prey to elude its predators The circuitry underlying the tail-flip escape reflex includes a pair of giant medullary neurons called Mauthner cells, their vestibular inputs, and the spinal cord motor neurons to which the Mauthner cells project. Movements in the water, such as might be caused by an approaching predator, excite saccular hair cells in the vestibular labyrinth. These receptor potentials are transmitted via the central processes of vestibular ganglion cells in cranial nerve VIII to the two Mauthner cells in the brainstem. As in the vestibulo-spinal pathway in humans, the Mauthner cells project directly to spinal motor neurons. The small number of synapses intervening between the receptor cells and the motor neurons is one of the ways that this circuit has been optimized for speed by natural selection, an arrangement evident in humans as well. The large size of the Mauthner axons is another the axons from these cells in a goldfish are about 50 m in diameter.The optimization for speed and direction in the escape reflex also is reflected in the synapses vestibular nerve afferents make on each Mauthner cell An appropriate direction for escape is promoted by two features: each Mauthner cell projects only to contralateral motor neurons and a local network of bilaterally projecting interneurons inhibits activity in the Mauthner cell away from the side on which the vestibular activity originates. In this way, the Mauthner cell on one side faithfully generates action potentials that command contractions of contralateral tail musculature, thus moving the fish out of the path of the oncoming predator. Conversely, the Mauthner cell on the opposite side is silenced by the local inhibitory network during the response The vestibular system provides information about the motion and position of the body in space. The sensory receptor cells of the vestibular system are located in the otolith organs and the semicircular canals of the inner ear. TheThe Vestibular System 333The Mauthner cells in fish are analogous to the reticulospinal and vestibulospinal pathways that control balance, posture, and orienting movements in mammals. The equivalent behavioral responses in humans are evident in a friendly game of tag, or more serious endeavors. From an evolutionary perspective, the chemical senses-particularly olfaction-are deemed the "oldest" sensory systems nevertheless, they remain in many ways the least understood of the sensory modalities. The olfactory system Hippocampal formation fMRI images showing focal activity in the regions of the olfactory bulb, pyriform cortex, and amygdala in a normal human being passively smelling odors. In humans, olfaction is often considered the least acute of the senses, and a number of animals are obviously superior to humans in their olfactory abilities. This difference may reflect the larger number of olfactory receptor neurons in the olfactory epithelium in many species and the proportionally larger area of the forebrain devoted to olfaction. In a 70-kg human, the surface area of the olfactory epithelium is approximately 10 cm 2 . In contrast, a 3-kg cat has about 20 cm 2 of olfactory epithelium. Similarly, the relative size of the olfactory bulb and related structures versus the cortical hemispheres in a rodent or carnivore is quite large compared to that in humans. Humans are nonetheless quite good at detecting and identifying airborne molecules in the environment Since the number of odorants is very large, there have been several attempts to classify them in groups. The most widely used classification was developed in the 1950s by John Amoore, who divided odors into categories based on their perceived quality, molecular structure, and the fact that some people, called anosmics, have difficulty smelling one or another group. Amoore classified odorants as pungent, Psychologists and neurologists have developed a variety of tests that measure the ability to detect common odors. Although most people are able to consistently identify a broad range of test odorants, others fail to identify one or more common smells The neural substrates for odor processing in humans includes all of the structures identified anatomically as part of the olfactory pathway: the olfactory bulb, pyriform and orbital cortices, amygdala and hypothalamus are all clearly activated by presentation of odorants in functional magnetic resonance images of normal human subjects In addition to olfactory perceptions, odorants can elicit a variety of physiological responses. Examples are the visceral motor responses to the aroma of appetizing food or to a noxious smell. Olfaction can also influence reproductive and endocrine functions. Women housed in single-sex dormitories, for instance, have menstrual cycles that tend to be synchronized, a phenomenon that appears to be mediated by olfaction. Volunteers exposed to gauze pads from the underarms of women at different stages of their menstrual cycles also tend to experience synchronized menses, and this synchronization can be disrupted by exposure to gauze pads from men. Olfaction also influences mother-child interactions. Infants recognize their mothers within hours after birth by smell, preferentially orienting toward their mothers breasts and showing increased rates of suckling when fed by their mother compared to being fed by other lactating females, or when presented experimentally with their mothers odor versus that of an unrelated female. By the same token, mothers can discriminate their own infants odor when challenged with a range of odor stimuli from infants of similar age.In other animals, including many mammals, species-specific odorants called pheromones play important roles in behavior, by influencing social, reproductive, and parenting behaviors. In rats and mice, odorants thought to be pheromones are detected by G-protein-coupled receptors located at the base of the nasal cavity in distinct, encapsulated chemosensory structures called vomeronasal organs. In many mammals, VNOs project to the accessory olfactory bulb, which in turn projects to the hypothalamus. VNOs are found bilaterally in only 8% of adult humans, and there is no clear indication that these human structures have any significant function. The human genes encoding homologues of pheromone receptors expressed by VNO neurons in other mammals are mostly pseudogenes. Thus, it is unlikely that human pheromone perception, if it exists, is mediated by the vomeronasal system, as is the case in other mammals. Nevertheless, recent observations suggest that exposure to androgen and estrogen-like compounds at concentrations below the level of conscious detection can elicit both behavioral responses and different patterns of brain activation in adult female and male human subjects The transduction of olfactory information occurs in the olfactory epithelium, the sheet of neurons and supporting cells that lines approximately half of the nasal cavities. The olfactory epithelium includes several cell types Posterior hypothalamus The matching of identified glomeruli with receptor cells expressing specific receptor molecules may be a general rule in olfactory systems. If so, the neurobiology of a sexually dimorphic olfactory behavior in the moth provides an ideal model system in which to study chemosensory processing of specific odorants. The cellular and molecular machinery for olfactory transduction is located in the cilia of olfactory receptor neurons Olfactory receptor molecules The numbers of odorant receptor genes in humans and other animals also varies widely Like other sensory receptor cells, individual olfactory receptor neurons are sensitive to a subset of stimuli. Presumably, depending on the particular olfactory receptor molecules they express, some olfactory receptor neurons exhibit marked selectivity to a particular chemical stimulus, whereas others are activated by a number of different odorant molecules Transducing and relaying odorant information centrally from olfactory receptor neurons are only the first steps in processing olfactory signals. As the olfactory receptor axons leave the olfactory epithelium, they coalesce to form a large number of bundles that together make up the olfactory nerveMost studies of olfaction in mammals have emphasized the spatial patterns of receptors in the nose and glomeruli in the bulb that are activated by specific odorants. However, beginning with Edgar Adrians study of the hedgehog olfactory bulb in 1942, odor-induced temporal oscillations have been described in species as diverse as turtles and primates. A variety of functions have been proposed for these oscillatory phenomena, including identification of odor type and perception of odor intensity. Gilles Laurent and colleagues at California Institute of Technology have recently found that olfaction in insects does show an important temporal component related to behavior. By recording intracellularly from neurons in the antennal lobe in crickets and extracellularly in the mushroom body, they found that the projection neurons in the antennal lobe respond to a given odor with a variety of temporal patterns that differ from odor to odor but are reproducible for the same odor. The figure here shows a schematic representation of these temporal aspects of the odor response of four such projection neurons. The upper panel shows a local field potential recording from the mushroom body that represents the synaptic activity of many neurons. During presentation of the odor, a pattern of activity is generated by the synchronized firing of many projection neurons. Interestingly, this oscillation at 20-30 Hz is independent of the odor. Each small sphere in the lower panels represents the state of one of the four neurons before, during, and after the application of an odorant. White balls represents a silent or inhibited state, blue balls an active but unsynchronized state, and orange balls an active and synchronized state. The figure shows that at different times during the odor presentation, various neurons are in synchrony and thus contribute at different times to the field potential recorded in the mushroom body. Desynchronizing the neurons has the effect of eliminating the 20-30 Hz oscillation. Desynchronization does not modify the insects responses to odors, but eliminates their ability to distinguish among similar odors.These observations suggest that coherent firing among neurons is an important component of olfactory processing in this species, and raise the possibility that temporal coding is a more important aspect of mammalian olfaction than has so far been imagined. Temporal coding of olfactory information in insects. Finally, granule cells, which constitute the innermost layer of the vertebrate olfactory bulb, synapse primarily on the basal dendrites of mitral cells within the external plexiform layer Bilaterally symmetrical subsets of glomeruli in the olfactory bulb Glomeruli in the olfactory bulb are the sole target of olfactory receptor neurons, and thus the only relay-via the axons of mitral and tufted cells-for olfactory information from the periphery to the rest of the brain. The mitral cell axons form a bundle-the lateral olfactory tract-that projects to the accessory olfactory nuclei, the olfactory tubercle, the entorhinal cortex, and portions of the amygdala The taste system, acting in concert with the olfactory and trigeminal systems, indicates whether food should be ingested. Once in the mouth, the chemical constituents of food interact with receptors on taste cells located in epithelial specializations called taste buds in the tongue. The taste cells transduce these stimuli and provide additional information about the identity, concentration, and pleasant or unpleasant quality of the substance. This information also prepares the gastrointestinal system to receive food by causing salivation and swallowing. Information about the temperature and texture of food is transduced and relayed from the mouth via somatic sensory receptors from the trigeminal and other sensory cranial nerves to the thalamus and somatic sensory cortices. Of course, food is not simply Amyl actetate concentration eaten for nutritional value "taste" also depends on cultural and psychological factors. How else can one explain why so many people enjoy consuming hot peppers or bitter-tasting liquids such as beerLike the olfactory system, the taste system includes both peripheral receptors and a number of central pathways Axons from the rostral part of the solitary nucleus project to the ventral posterior complex of the thalamus, where they terminate in the medial half of the ventral posterior medial nucleus. This nucleus projects in turn to several regions of the cortex, including the anterior insula in the temporal lobe and the operculum of the frontal lobe. There is also a secondary cortical taste area in the caudolateral orbitofrontal cortex, where neurons respond to combinations of visual, somatic sensory, olfactory, and gustatory stimuli. Interestingly, when a given food is consumed to the point of satiety, specific orbitofrontal neurons in the monkey diminish their activity to that tastant, suggesting that these neurons are involved in the motivation to eat particular foods. Finally, reciprocal projections connect the nucleus of the solitary tract via the pons to the hypothalamus and amygdala Most taste stimuli are nonvolatile, hydrophilic molecules soluble in saliva. Examples include salts such as NaCl needed for electrolyte balance essential amino acids such as glutamate needed for protein synthesis sugars such as glucose needed for energy and acids such as citric acid that indicate the palatability of various foods. Bitter-tasting molecules, including plant alkaloids like atropine, quinine, and strychnine, indicate foods that may be poisonous. Placing bitter compounds in the mouth usually deters ingestion unless one "acquires a taste" for the substance, as for the quinine in tonic water.The taste system encodes information about the quantity as well as the identity of stimuli. In general, the higher the stimulus concentration, the greater the perceived intensity of taste. Threshold concentrations for most ingested tastants are quite high, however. For example, the threshold concentration for citric acid is about 2 mM for salt, 10 mM and for sucrose, 20 mM. Because the body requires substantial concentrations of salts and carbohydrates, taste cells may respond only to relatively high concentrations of these essential substances in order to promote an adequate intake. Clearly, it is advantageous for the taste system to detect potentially dangerous substances at much lower concentrations. Thus the threshold concentration for quinine is 0.008 mM, and for strychnine 0.0001 mM. As in olfaction, gustatory sensitivity declines with age. Adults tend to add more salt and spices to food than children. The decreased sensitivity to salt can be problematic for older people with electrolyte andor fluid balance problems. Unfortunately, a safe and effective substitute for NaCl has not yet been developed.There is a common misconception that sweet is perceived at the tip of the tongue, salt along its posterolateral edges, sour along the mediolateral edges, and bitter on the back of the tongue. This arrangement was initially proposed in 1901 by Deiter Hanig, who measured taste thresholds for NaCl, sucrose, quinine, and hydrochloric acid. Hanig never said that other regions of the tongue were insensitive to these chemicals, but only indicated which regions were most sensitive. People missing the anterior part of their tongue can still taste sweet and salty stimuli. In fact, all of these tastes can be detected over the full surface the tongue Based on general agreement across cultures, there are five perceptually distinct categories of taste: salt, sour, sweet, umami, and bitter. However, there are obvious limitations to this classification. People experience a variety of taste sensations in addition to these five, including astringent, pungent, fat, starchy, and various metallic tastes, to name only a few. In addition, mixtures of chemicals may elicit entirely new taste sensations. But even though the "taste code" defined by the five primary taste classes is not yet fully understood, these tastes correspond to distinct classes of receptors in subsets of taste cells. Thus, taste perception is closely linked to the molecular biology of taste transduction.Taste responses vary among individuals. For example, many people cannot taste the bitter compound phenylthiocarbamide but can taste molecules such as quinine and caffeine that also produce bitter sensations. Indeed, humans can be divided into two groups with quite different thresholds for bitter compounds containing the N-CS group found in PTC. The difference between these individuals is the presence of a single autosomal gene with a dominant and a recessive allele. Interestingly, people who are extremely sensitive to PTC or its analogues-so-called called "supertasters"-have more taste buds than normal and tend to avoid certain foods such as grapefruit, green tea, and broccoli, all of which contain bitter-tasting compounds. Thus, an individuals genetic makeup with respect to taste receptors has implications for diet, and even health.The relationship between taste perception and the molecular character of tastants is also variable. A number of quite different compounds taste sweet to humans. These include saccharides, organic anions, amino acids, L-phenyalanine methyl ester, and proteins. People can distinguish among different sweeteners, and some find saccharin to have a bitter-tasting component. One reason for such discrimination is that some of these compounds activate separate receptors. For example, saccharides activate cAMP pathways, whereas nonsac-  Clearly, a given individuals perception of tastants results from many idiosyncracies of the taste system. These idiosyncracies may underlie personal preferences and aversions that lead to individual variation in ingestive behaviors. The French aphorism chacun  son got reflects not only individual preferences but the biology of the taste-sensing system.Approximately 4000 taste buds in humans are distributed throughout the oral cavity and upper alimentary canal. Taste buds are about 50 mm wide at their base and approximately 80 mm long, each containing 30 to 100 taste cells, plus a few basal cells Taste cells in individual taste buds The initiating events of chemosensory transduction occur in the taste cells, which have receptors on microvilli that emerge from the apical surface of the taste cell The major perceptual categories of taste-salty, sour, sweet, umami, and bitter-are represented by five distinct classes of taste receptors. These receptors are found in the apical microvilli of taste cells. Salty and sour tastes are primarily elicited by ionic stimuli such as the positively charged ions in salts, or the H  in acids. These ions in salty and sour tastants initiate sensory transduction via specific ion channels: the amiloride-sensitive Na  channel for salty tastes, and an H  -sensitive, cation-selective channel for sour In humans and other mammals, sweet and amino acid receptors are heteromeric G-protein-coupled receptors that share a common seventransmembrane receptor subunit called T1R3, which is paired with the T1R2 seven-transmembrane receptor for perception of sweet, or with the T1R1 receptor for amino acids Another family of G-protein-coupled receptors known as the T2R receptors transduce bitter tastes. There are approximately 30 T2R subtypes encoded by 30 genes in humans and other mammals, and multiple T2R subtypes are expressed in single taste cells. Nevertheless, T2R receptors are not expressed in the same taste cells as T1R1, 2, and 3 receptors. Thus, the receptor cells for bitter tastants are presumably a distinct class. Although the transduction of bitter stimuli relies on a similar mechanism to that for sweet and amino acid tastes, a taste cell-specific G-protein, gustducin, is found primarily in T2R-expressing taste cells and apparently contributes to the transduction of bitter tastes. The remaining steps in bitter transduction are similar to those for sweet and amino acids: PLC 2 -mediated activation of TRPM 5 channels depolarizes the taste cell, resulting in the release of neurotransmitter at the synapse between the taste cell and sensory ganglion cell axon.  In the taste system, neural coding refers to the way that the identity, concentration, and "hedonic" value of tastants is represented in the pattern of action potentials relayed to the brain. Neurons in the taste system might be specifically "tuned" to respond with a maximal change in electrical activity to a single taste stimulus. Such tuning is thought to rely on specificity at the level of the receptor cells, as well as on the maintenance of separate channels for the relay of this information from the periphery to the brain. This sort of coding scheme is referred to as a labeled line code, since responses in specific cells presumably correspond to distinct stimuli. The segregated expression of sweet, amino acid, and bitter receptors in different taste cells These observations suggest that sweet and amino acid transduction and perception depend on labeled lines from the periphery. Bitter taste proved harder to analyze because of the larger number of T2R bitter receptors. To circumvent this challenge, Charles Zuker, Nicholas Ryba and colleagues took advantage of the shared aspects of intracellular signaling for sweet, amino acid, and bitter tastes These observations support the labeled line hypothesis for primary tastes however, they do not provide a full account of how either primary or complex tastes are represented in patterns of neural activity in central stations of the taste system. Indeed, little is known about the representation of taste information in the CNS, either at the level of recordings from individual cells or the representation of tastes across an ensemble of neurons in relevant areas of the brainstem, thalamus, or cortex.The third of the major chemosensory systems, the trigeminal chemosensory system, consists of polymodal nociceptive neurons and their axons in the trigeminal nerve and, to a lesser degree, nociceptive neurons whose axons run in the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. These neurons and their associated endings are typically activated by chemicals classified as irritants, including air pollutants, ammonia, ethanol, acetic acid, carbon dioxide, menthol, and capsaicin. Irritant-sensitive polymodal nociceptors alert the organism to potentially harmful chemical stimuli that have been ingested, respired, or come in contact with the face, and are closely tied to the trigeminal pain system discussed in Chapter 9.Trigeminal chemosensory information from the face, scalp, cornea, and mucous membranes of the oral and nasal cavities is relayed via the three major sensory branches of the trigeminal nerve: the ophthalmic, maxillary, Wild typeWild typeWild typeWild typeand mandibular A variety of physiological responses mediated by the trigeminal chemosensory system are triggered by exposure to irritants. These include increased salivation, vasodilation, tearing, nasal secretion, sweating, decreased respiratory rate, and bronchoconstriction. Consider, for instance, the experience that follows the ingestion of capsaicin. These reactions are generally protective in that they dilute the stimulus and prevent inhaling or ingesting more of it.The receptors for irritants are primarily on the terminal branches of polymodal nociceptive neurons, as described for the pain and temperature systems in Chapter 9. Although these receptors respond to many of the same stimuli as olfactory receptor neurons, they are probably not activated by the same mechanism for instance, the G-proteincoupled receptors for odorants are found only in olfactory receptor neurons. With the exception of capsaicin and acidic stimuli, both of which activate cation-selective ion channels, little is known about the transduction mechanisms for irritants, or their central processing.  Trigeminal ganglionThe chemical senses-olfaction, taste, and the trigeminal chemosensory system-all contribute to sensing airborne or soluble molecules from a variety of sources. Humans and other mammals rely on this information for behaviors as diverse as attraction, avoidance, reproduction, feeding, and avoiding potentially dangerous circumstances. Receptor neurons in the olfactory epithelium transduce chemical stimuli into neuronal activity via the stimulation of G-protein-linked receptors this interaction leads to elevated levels of second messengers such as cAMP, which in turn open cation-selective channels. These events generate receptor potentials in the membrane of the olfactory receptor neuron, and ultimately action potentials in the afferent axons of these cells. Taste receptor cells, in contrast, use a variety of mechanisms for transducing chemical stimuli. These include ion channels that are directly activated by salts and amino acids, and G-protein-linked receptors that activate second messengers. For both smell and taste, the spatial and temporal patterns of action potentials provide information about the identity and intensity of chemical stimuli. The trigeminal chemosensory system responds to irritants by means of mechanisms that are less well understood. Each of the approximately 10,000 odors that humans recognize is evidently encoded by the activity of a distinct population of receptor cells in the nose, tongue, and oral cavity. Olfaction, taste, and trigeminal chemosensation all are relayed via specific pathways in the central nervous system. Receptor neurons in the olfactory system project directly to the olfactory bulb. In the taste system, information is relayed centrally by cranial sensory ganglion cells to the solitary nucleus in the brainstem. In the trigeminal chemosensory system, information is relayed via trigeminal ganglion cell projections to the spinal trigeminal nucleus in the brainstem. Each of these structures project in turn to many sites in the brain that process chemosensory information in ways that give rise to some of the most sublime pleasures that humans experience.Carbon chain length PEA Pyr Men  Movements, whether voluntary or involuntary, are produced by spatial and temporal patterns of muscular contractions orchestrated by the brain and spinal cord. Analysis of these circuits is fundamental to an understanding of both normal behavior and the etiology of a variety of neurological disorders. This unit considers the brainstem and spinal cord circuitry that make elementary reflex movements possible, as well as the circuits that organize the intricate patterns of neural activity responsible for more complex motor acts. Ultimately, all movements produced by the skeletal musculature are initiated by "lower" motor neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem that directly innervate skeletal muscles the innervation of visceral smooth muscles is separately organized by the autonomic divisions of the visceral motor system. The lower motor neurons are controlled directly by local circuits within the spinal cord and brainstem that coordinate individual muscle groups, and indirectly by "upper" motor neurons in higher centers that regulate those local circuits, thus enabling and coordinating complex sequences of movements. Especially important are circuits in the basal ganglia and cerebellum that regulate the upper motor neurons, ensuring that movements are performed with spatial and temporal precision.Specific disorders of movement often signify damage to a particular brain region. For example, clinically important and intensively studied neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinsons disease, Huntingtons disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis result from pathological changes in different parts of the motor system. Knowledge of the various levels of motor control is essential for understanding, diagnosing, and treating these diseases.Skeletal muscle contraction is initiated by "lower" motor neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem. The cell bodies of the lower neurons are located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord gray matter and in the motor nuclei of the cranial nerves in the brainstem. These neurons send axons directly to skeletal muscles via the ventral roots and spinal peripheral nerves, or via cranial nerves in the case of the brainstem nuclei. The spatial and temporal patterns of activation of lower motor neurons are determined primarily by local circuits located within the spinal cord and brainstem. Descending pathways from higher centers comprise the axons of "upper" motor neurons and modulate the activity of lower motor neurons by influencing this local circuitry. The cell bodies of upper motor neurons are located either in the cortex or in brainstem centers, such as the vestibular nucleus, the superior colliculus, and the reticular formation. The axons of the upper motor neurons typically contact the local circuit neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord, which, via relatively short axons, contact in turn the appropriate combinations of lower motor neurons. The local circuit neurons also receive direct input from sensory neurons, thus mediating important sensory motor reflexes that operate at the level of the brainstem and spinal cord. Lower motor neurons, therefore, are the final common pathway for transmitting neural information from a variety of sources to the skeletal muscles.The neural circuits responsible for the control of movement can be divided into four distinct but highly interactive subsystems, each of which makes a unique contribution to motor control The second motor subsystem consists of the upper motor neurons whose cell bodies lie in the brainstem or cerebral cortex and whose axons descend to synapse with the local circuit neurons or, more rarely, with the lower motor neurons directly. The upper motor neuron pathways that arise in the cortex are essential for the initiation of voluntary movements and for complex spatiotemporal sequences of skilled movements. In particular, descending projections from cortical areas in the frontal lobe, including Brodmanns area 4, the lateral part of area 6, and the medial part of area 6 are essential for planning, initiating, and directing sequences of voluntary movements. Upper motor neurons originating in the brainstem are responsible for regulating muscle tone and for orienting the eyes, head, and body with respect to vestibular, somatic, auditory, and visual sensory information. Their contributions are thus critical for basic navigational movements, and for the control of posture.The third and fourth subsystems are complex circuits with output pathways that have no direct access to either the local circuit neurons or the lower motor neurons instead, they control movement by regulating the activity of the upper motor neurons. The third and larger of these subsystems, the cerebellum, is located on the dorsal surface of the pons. The cerebellum acts via its efferent pathways to the upper motor neurons as a servomechanism, detecting the difference, or "motor error," between an intended movement and the movement actually performed. The cerebellum uses this information about discrepancies to mediate both real-time and long-term reductions in these motor errors. As might be expected from this account, patients with cerebellar damage exhibit persistent errors in movement. The fourth subsystem, embedded in the depths of the forebrain, consists of a group of structures collectively referred to as the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia suppress unwanted movements and prepare upper motor neuron circuits for the initiation of movements. The problems associated with disorders of basal ganglia, such as Parkinsons disease and Huntingtons disease, attest to the importance of this complex in the initiation of voluntary movements. Despite much effort, the sequence of events that leads from volitional thought to movement is still poorly understood. The picture is clearest, however, at the level of control of the muscles themselves. It therefore makes sense to begin an account of motor behavior by considering the anatomical and physiological relationships between lower motor neurons and the muscle fibers they innervate.By injecting individual muscle groups with visible tracers that are transported by the axons of the lower motor neurons back to their cell bodies, the lower motor neurons that innervate each of the bodys skeletal muscles can be seen in histological sections of the ventral horns of the spinal cord. Each lower motor neuron innervates muscle fibers within a single muscle, and all the motor neurons innervating a single muscle are grouped together into rod-shaped clusters that run parallel to the long axis of the cord for one or more spinal cord segments An orderly relationship between the location of the motor neuron pools and the muscles they innervate is evident both along the length of the spinal cord and across the mediolateral dimension of the cord, an arrangement that in effect provides a spatial map of the bodys musculature. For example, the motor neuron pools that innervate the arm are located in the cervical enlargement of the cord and those that innervate the leg in the lumbar enlargement. The mapping, or topography, of motor neuron pools in the mediolateral dimension can be appreciated in a cross section through the cervical enlargement Two types of lower motor neuron are found in these neuronal pools. Small g motor neurons innervate specialized muscle fibers that, in combina-tion with the nerve fibers that innervate them, are actually sensory receptors called muscle spindles. The muscle spindles are embedded within connective tissue capsules in the muscle, and are thus referred to as intrafusal muscle fibers. The intrafusal muscle fibers are also innervated by sensory axons that send information to the brain and spinal cord about the length and tension of the muscle. The function of the  motor neurons is to regulate this sensory input by setting the intrafusal muscle fibers to an appropriate length. The second type of lower motor neuron, called a motor neurons, innervates the extrafusal muscle fibers, which are the striated muscle fibers that actually generate the forces needed for posture and movement.Although the following discussion focuses on the lower motor neurons in the spinal cord, comparable sets of motor neurons responsible for the control of muscles in the head and neck are located in the brainstem. The latter neurons are distributed in the eight motor nuclei of the cranial nerves in the medulla, pons, and midbrain. Somewhat confusingly, but quite appropriately, these motor neurons in the brainstem are also called lower motor neurons. Most mature extrafusal skeletal muscle fibers in mammals are innervated by only a single  motor neuron. Since there are by far more muscle fibers than motor neurons, individual motor axons branch within muscles to synapse on many different fibers that are typically distributed over a relatively wide area within the muscle, presumably to ensure that the contractile force of the motor unit is spread evenly These distinctions among different types of motor units indicate how the nervous system produces movements appropriate for different circumstances. In most muscles, small, slow motor units have lower thresholds for activation than the larger units and are tonically active during motor acts that require sustained effort. The thresholds for the large, fast motor units are reached only when rapid movements requiring great force are made, such as jumping. The functional distinctions betweenTime Increasing or decreasing the number of motor units active at any one time changes the amount of force produced by a muscle. In the 1960s, Elwood Henneman and his colleagues at Harvard Medical School found that progressive increases in muscle tension could be produced by progressively increasing the activity of axons that provide input to the relevant pool of lower motor neurons. This gradual increase in tension results from the recruitment of motor units in a fixed order according to their size. By stimulating either sensory nerves or upper motor pathways that project to a lower motor neuron pool while measuring the tension changes in the muscle, Henneman found that in experimental animals only the smallest motor units in the pool are activated by weak synaptic stimulation. When synaptic input increases, progressively larger motor units that generate larger forces are recruited: As the synaptic activity driving a motor neuron pool increases, low threshold S units are recruited first, then FR units, and finally, at the highest levels of activity, the FF units. Since these original experiments, evidence for the orderly recruitment of motor units has been found in a variety of voluntary and reflexive movements. As a result, this systematic relationship has come to be known as the size principle. An illustration of how the size principle operates for the motor units of the medial gastrocnemius muscle in the cat is shown in The frequency of the action potentials generated by motor neurons also contributes to the regulation of muscle tension. The increase in force that The local circuitry within the spinal cord mediates a number of sensory motor reflex actions. The simplest of these reflex arcs entails a sensory response to muscle stretch, which provides direct excitatory feedback to the motor neurons innervating the muscle that has been stretched 