Summary 313 The Limbic System 693The Importance of the Amygdala 697The The Meninges 768The Ventricular System 770Contents xvWhether judged in molecular, cellular, systemic, behavioral, or cognitive terms, the human nervous system is a stupendous piece of biological machinery. Given its accomplishments-all the artifacts of human culture, for instance-there is good reason for wanting to understand how the brain and the rest of the nervous system works. The debilitating and costly effects of neurological and psychiatric disease add a further sense of urgency to this quest. The aim of this book is to highlight the intellectual challenges and excitement-as well as the uncertainties-of what many see as the last great frontier of biological science. The information presented should serve as a starting point for undergraduates, medical students, graduate students in the neurosciences, and others who want to understand how the human nervous system operates. Like any other great challenge, neuroscience should be, and is, full of debate, dissension, and considerable fun. All these ingredients have gone into the construction of the third edition of this book; we hope they will be conveyed in equal measure to readers at all levels. A Visual Glossary of Human Neuroanatomy (CD-ROM) S. Mark Williams, Leonard E. White, and Andrew C. MaceSylvius for Neuroscience: A Visual Glossary of Human Neuroanatomy, included in every copy of the textbook, is an interactive CD reference guide to the structure of the human nervous system. By entering a corresponding page number from the textbook, students can quickly search the CD for any neuroanatomical structure or term and view corresponding images and animations. Descriptive information is provided with all images and animations. Additionally, students can take notes on the content and share these with other Sylvius users.Sylvius is an essential study aid for learning basic human neuroanatomy.• Over 400 neuroanatomical structures and terms.• High-resolution images.• Animations of pathways and 3-D reconstructions.• Definitions and descriptions.• Audio pronunciations.• A searchable glossary.• Categories of anatomical structures and terms (e.g., cranial nerves, spinal cord tracts, lobes, cortical areas, etc.), that can be easily browsed. In addition, structures can be browsed by textbook chapter.• Images and text relevant to the textbook: Icons in the textbook indicate specific content on the CD. By entering a textbook page number, students can automatically load the relevant images and text.• A history feature that allows the student to quickly reload recently viewed structures.• A bookmark feature that adds bookmarks to structures of interest; bookmarks are automatically stored on the student's computer.• A notes feature that allows students to type notes for any selected structure; notes are automatically saved on the student's computer and can be shared among students and instructors (i.e., imported and exported).• A self-quiz mode that allows for testing on structure identification and functional information.• A print feature that formats images and text for printed output.• An image zoom tool.Instructor's Resource CD  This expanded resource includes all the figures and tables from the textbook in JPEG format, reformatted and relabeled for optimal readability. Also included are ready-to-use PowerPoint ® presentations of all figures and tables. In addition, new for the Third Edition, the Instructor's Resource CD includes a set of short-answer study questions for each chapter in Microsoft ® Word ® format.  This set includes 100 illustrations (approximately 150 transparencies), selected from throughout the textbook for teaching purposes. These are relabeled and optimized for projection in classrooms.Neuroscience encompasses a broad range of questions about how nervous systems are organized, and how they function to generate behavior. These questions can be explored using the analytical tools of genetics, molecular and cell biology, systems anatomy and physiology, behavioral biology, and psychology. The major challenge for a student of neuroscience is to integrate the diverse knowledge derived from these various levels of analysis into a more or less coherent understanding of brain structure and function (one has to qualify this statement because so many questions remain unanswered). Many of the issues that have been explored successfully concern how the principal cells of any nervous system-neurons and glia-perform their basic functions in anatomical, electrophysiological, and molecular terms. The varieties of neurons and supporting glial cells that have been identified are assembled into ensembles called neural circuits, and these circuits are the primary components of neural systems that process specific types of information. Neural systems comprise neurons and circuits in a number of discrete anatomical locations in the brain. These systems subserve one of three general functions. Sensory systems represent information about the state of the organism and its environment, motor systems organize and generate actions; and associational systems link the sensory and motor sides of the nervous system, providing the basis for "higher-order" functions such as perception, attention, cognition, emotions, rational thinking, and other complex brain functions that lie at the core of understanding human beings, their history and their future.The recently completed sequencing of the genome in humans, mice, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, and the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans is perhaps the logical starting point for studying the brain and the rest of the nervous system; after all, this inherited information is also the starting point of each individual organism. The relative ease of obtaining, analyzing, and correlating gene sequences with neurobiological observations has facilitated a wealth of new insights into the basic biology of the nervous system. In parallel with studies of normal nervous systems, the genetic analysis of human pedigrees with various brain diseases has led to a widespread sense that it will soon be possible to understand and treat disorders long considered beyond the reach of science and medicine.A the transcript of any gene is flanked by upstream (or 5′) and downstream (or 3′) regulatory sequences that control gene expression. In addition, sequences between exons-called introns-further influence transcription. Of the approximately 35,000 genes in the human genome, a majority are expressed in the developing and adult brain; the same is true in mice, flies, and worms-the species commonly used in modern genetics (and increasingly in neuroscience) One of the most promising dividends of sequencing the human genome has been the realization that one or a few genes, when altered (mutated), can begin to explain some aspects of neurological and psychiatric diseases. Before the "postgenomic era" (which began following completion of the sequencing of the human genome), many of the most devastating brain diseases remained largely mysterious because there was little sense of how or why the normal biology of the nervous system was compromised. The identification of genes correlated with disorders such as Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, major depression, and schizophrenia has provided a promising start to understanding these pathological processes in a much deeper way (and thus devising rational therapies).Genetic and genomic information alone do not completely explain how the brain normally works or how disease processes disrupt its function. To achieve these goals it is equally essential to understand the cell biology, anatomy, and physiology of the brain in health as well as disease.Early in the nineteenth century, the cell was recognized as the fundamental unit of all living organisms. It was not until well into the twentieth century, however, that neuroscientists agreed that nervous tissue, like all other organs, is made up of these fundamental units. The major reason was that the first generation of "modern" neurobiologists in the nineteenth century had difficulty resolving the unitary nature of nerve cells with the microscopes and cell staining techniques that were then available. This inade- . As a result, some biologists of that era concluded that each nerve cell was connected to its neighbors by protoplasmic links, forming a continuous nerve cell network, or reticulum. The "reticular theory" of nerve cell communication, which was championed by the Italian neuropathologist Camillo Golgi (for whom the Golgi apparatus in cells is named), eventually fell from favor and was replaced by what came to be known as the "neuron doctrine." The major proponents of this new perspective were the Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal and the British physiologist Charles Sherrington.The contrasting views represented by Golgi and Cajal occasioned a spirited debate in the early twentieth century that set the course of modern neuroscience. Based on light microscopic examination of nervous tissue stained with silver salts according to a method pioneered by Golgi, Cajal argued persuasively that nerve cells are discrete entities, and that they communicate with one another by means of specialized contacts that Sherrington called "synapses." The work that framed this debate was recognized by the award of the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1906 to both Golgi and Cajal ( the joint award suggests some ongoing concern about just who was correct, despite Cajal's overwhelming evidence). The subsequent work of Sherrington and others demonstrating the transfer of electrical signals at synaptic junctions between nerve cells provided strong support of the "neuron doctrine," but challenges to the autonomy of individual neurons remained. It was not until the advent of electron microscopy in the 1950s that any lingering doubts about the discreteness of neurons were resolved. The high-magnification, high-resolution pictures that could be obtained with the electron microscope clearly established that nerve cells are functionally independent units; such pictures also identified the specialized cellular junctions that Sherrington had named synapses (see Figures 1.3 and 1.4). The histological studies of Cajal, Golgi, and a host of successors led to the further consensus that the cells of the nervous system can be divided into two broad categories: nerve cells (or neurons), and supporting cells called neuroglia (or simply glia; see Neurons and glia share the complement of organelles found in all cells, including the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, mitochondria, and a variety of vesicular structures. In neurons, however, these organelles are often more prominent in distinct regions of the cell. In addition to the distribution of organelles and subcellular components, neurons and glia are in some measure different from other cells in the specialized fibrillar or tubular proteins that constitute the cytoskeleton (Figures 1.3 and 1.4). Although many of these proteins-isoforms of actin, tubulin, and myosin, as well as several others-are found in other cells, their distinctive organization in neurons is critical for the stability and function of neuronal processes and synaptic junctions. The filaments, tubules, vesicular motors, and scaffolding proteins of neurons orchestrate the growth of axons and dendrites; the trafficking and appropiate positioning of membrane components, organelles, and vesicles; and the active processes of exocytosis and endocytosis that underlie synaptic communication. Understanding the ways in which these molecular components are used to insure the proper development and function of neurons and glia remains a primary focus of modern neurobiology.The basic cellular organization of neurons resembles that of other cells; however, they are clearly distinguished by specialization for intercellular communication. This attribute is apparent in their overall morphology, in the specific organization of their membrane components for electrical signaling, and in the structural and functional intricacies of the synaptic contacts between neurons (see Figures 1.3 and 1.4). The most obvious sign of neuronal specialization for communication via electrical signaling is the extensive branching of neurons. The most salient aspect of this branching for typical nerve cells is the elaborate arborization of dendrites that arise from the neuronal cell body (also called dendritic branches or dendritic processes). Dendrites are the primary target for synaptic input from other neurons and are   also distinguished by their high content of ribosomes as well as specific cytoskeletal proteins that reflect their function in receiving and integrating information from other neurons. The spectrum of neuronal geometries ranges from a small minority of cells that lack dendrites altogether to neurons with dendritic arborizations that rival the complexity of a mature tree (see The information conveyed by synapses on the neuronal dendrites is integrated and "read out" at the origin of the axon, the portion of the nerve cell specialized for signal conduction to the next site of synaptic interaction (see Relatively short axons are a feature of local circuit neurons or interneurons throughout the brain. The axons of projection neurons, however, extend to distant targets. For example, the axons that run from the human spinal cord to the foot are about a meter long. The electrical event that carries signals over such distances is called the action potential, which is a self-regenerating wave of electrical activity that propagates from its point of initiation at the cell body (called the axon hillock) to the terminus of the axon where synaptic contacts are made. The target cells of neurons include other nerve cells in the brain, spinal cord, and autonomic ganglia, and the cells of muscles and glands throughout the body.The chemical and electrical process by which the information encoded by action potentials is passed on at synaptic contacts to the next cell in a pathway is called synaptic transmission. Presynaptic terminals (also called synaptic endings, axon terminals, or terminal boutons) and their postsynaptic specializations are typically chemical synapses, the most abundant type of synapse in the nervous system. Another type, the electrical synapse, is far more rare (see Chapter 5). The secretory organelles in the presynaptic terminal of chemical synapses are synaptic vesicles (see The intricate and concerted activity of neurotransmitters, receptors, related cytoskeletal elements, and signal transduction molecules are thus the basis for nerve cells communicating with one another, and with effector cells in muscles and glands.Neuroglial cells-also referred to as glial cells or simply glia-are quite different from nerve cells. Glia are more numerous than neurons in the brain, outnumbering them by a ratio of perhaps 3 to 1. The major distinction is that glia do not participate directly in synaptic interactions and electrical signaling, although their supportive functions help define synaptic contacts and maintain the signaling abilities of neurons. Although glial cells also have complex processes extending from their cell bodies, these are generally less prominent than neuronal branches, and do not serve the same purposes as axons and dendrites There are three types of glial cells in the mature central nervous system: astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglial cells (see Finally, microglial cells are derived primarily from hematopoietic precursor cells (although some may be derived directly from neural precursor cells). They share many properties with macrophages found in other tissues, and are primarily scavenger cells that remove cellular debris from sites of injury or normal cell turnover. In addition, microglia, like their macrophage counterparts, secrete signaling molecules-particularly a wide range of cytokines that are also produced by cells of the immune system-that can modulate local inflammation and influence cell survival or death. Indeed, some neurobiologists prefer to categorize microglia as a type of macrophage. Following brain damage, the number of microglia at the site of injury increases dramatically. Some of these cells proliferate from microglia resident in the brain, while others come from macrophages that migrate to the injured area and enter the brain via local disruptions in the cerebral vasculature.Although the cellular constituents of the human nervous system are in many ways similar to those of other organs, they are unusual in their extraordinary numbers: the human brain is estimated to contain 100 billion neurons and several times as many supporting cells. More importantly, the nervous system has a greater range of distinct cell types-whether categorized by morphology, molecular identity, or physiological activity-than any other organ system (a fact that presumably explains why so many different genes are expressed in the nervous system; see above). The cellular diversity of any nervous system-including our own-undoubtedly underlies the the capacity of the system to form increasingly complicated networks to mediate increasingly sophisticated behaviors.For much of the twentieth century, neuroscientists relied on the same set of techniques developed by Cajal and Golgi to describe and categorize the diversity of cell types in the nervous system. From the late 1970s onward, however, new technologies made possible by the advances in cell and molecular biology provided investigators with many additional tools to discern the properties of neurons explored much more fully. Tracers can be introduced into either living or fixed tissue, and are transported along nerve cell processes to reveal their origin and termination. More recently, genetic and neuroanatomical methods have been combined to visualize the expression of fluorescent or other tracer molecules under the control of regulatory sequences of neural genes. This approach, which shows individual cells in fixed or living tissue in remarkable detail, allows nerve cells to be identified by both their transcriptional state and their structure. Finally, ways of determining the molecular identity and morphology of nerve cells can be combined with measurements of their physiological activity, thus illuminating structure-function relationships. Examples of these various approaches are shown in Neurons never function in isolation; they are organized into ensembles or neural circuits that process specific kinds of information and provide the foundation of sensation, perception and behavior. The synaptic connections that define such circuits are typically made in a dense tangle of dendrites, axons terminals, and glial cell processes that together constitute what is called neuropil (the suffix -pil comes from the Greek word pilos, meaning "felt"; see flexor muscles; therefore they are capable of modulating the input-output linkage. The excitatory synaptic connections between the sensory afferents and the extensor efferent motor neurons cause the extensor muscles to contract; at the same time, the interneurons activated by the afferents are inhibitory, and their activation diminishes electrical activity in flexor efferent motor neurons and causes the flexor muscles to become less active ( For the myotatic circuit, electrical activity can be measured both extracellularly and intracellularly, thus defining the functional relationships between neurons in the circuit. The pattern of action potential activity can be measured for each element of the circuit (afferents, efferents, and interneurons) before, during, and after a stimulus (see When considered together, circuits that process similar types of information comprise neural systems that serve broader behavioral purposes. The most general functional distinction divides such collections into sensory systems that acquire and process information from the environment (e.g., the visual system or the auditory system, see Unit II), and motor systems that respond to such information by generating movements and other behavior (see Unit III). There are, however, large numbers of cells and circuits that lie between these relatively well-defined input and output systems. These are collectively referred to as associational systems, and they mediate the most complex and least well-characterized brain functions (see Unit V).In addition to these broad functional distinctions, neuroscientists and neurologists have conventionally divided the vertebrate nervous system anatomically into central and peripheral components Those nerve cell bodies that reside in the peripheral nervous system are located in ganglia, which are simply local accumulations of nerve cell bodies (and supporting cells). Peripheral axons are gathered into bundles called nerves, many of which are enveloped by the glial cells of the peripheral nervous system called Schwann cells. In the central nervous system, nerve cells are arranged in two different ways. Nuclei are local accumulations of neurons having roughly similar connections and functions; such collections are found throughout the cerebrum, brainstem and spinal cord. In contrast, cortex (plural, cortices) describes sheet-like arrays of nerve cells (again, consult Appendix A for additional information and illustrations). The cortices of the cerebral hemispheres and of the cerebellum provide the clearest example of this organizational principle.Axons in the central nervous system are gathered into tracts that are more or less analogous to nerves in the periphery. Tracts that cross the midline of the brain are referred to as commissures. Two gross histological terms distinguish regions rich in neuronal cell bodies versus regions rich in axons. Gray matter refers to any accumulation of cell bodies and neuropil in the brain and spinal cord (e.g., nuclei or cortices), whereas white matter, named for its relatively light appearance resulting from the lipid content of myelin, refers to axon tracts and commissures.  The organization of the visceral motor division of the peripheral nervous system is a bit more complicated (see Chapter 20). Visceral motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord, the so-called preganglionic neurons, form synapses with peripheral motor neurons that lie in the autonomic ganglia. The motor neurons in autonomic ganglia innervate smooth muscle, glands, and cardiac muscle, thus controlling most involuntary (visceral) behavior. In the sympathetic division of the autonomic motor system, the ganglia lie along or in front of the vertebral column and send their axons to a variety of peripheral targets. In the parasympathetic division, the ganglia are found within the organs they innervate. Another component of the visceral motor system, called the enteric system, is made up of small ganglia as well as individual neurons scattered throughout the wall of the gut. These neurons influence gastric motility and secretion.Describing the organization of any neural system requires a rudimentary understanding of anatomical terminology. The terms used to specify location in the central nervous system are the same as those used for the gross anatomical description of the rest of the body The proper assignment of the anatomical axes then dictates the standard planes for histological sections or live images (see Box A) used to study the internal anatomy of the brain (see The central nervous system (defined as the brain and spinal cord) is usually considered to have seven basic parts: the spinal cord, the medulla, the pons, the cerebellum, the midbrain, the diencephalon, and the cerebral hemispheres (see The brainstem is also a conduit for several major tracts in the central nervous system that relay sensory information from the spinal cord and brainstem to the forebrain, or relay motor commands from forebrain back to motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord. Accordingly, detailed knowledge of the consequences of damage to the brainstem provides neurologists and other clinicians an essential tool in the localization and diagnosis of brain injury. The brainstem contains numerous additional nuclei that are involved in a myriad of important functions including the control of heart rate, respiration, blood pressure, and level of consciousness. Finally, one of the most prominent features of the brainstem is the cerebellum, which extends over much of its dorsal aspect. The cerebellum is essential for the coordination and planning of movements (see Chapter 18) as well as learning motor tasks and storing that information (see Chapter 30).There are several anatomical subdivisions of the forebrain. The most obvious anatomical structures are the prominent cerebral hemispheres The remaining subdivisions of the forebrain lie deeper in the cerebral hemispheres This rudimentary description of some prominent anatomical landmarks provides a framework for understanding how neurons resident in a number of widely distributed and distinct brain structures communicate with one another to define neural systems dedicated to encoding, processing and relaying specific sorts of information about aspects of the organism's environment, and then initiating and coordinating appropriate behavioral responses.These complex perceptual and motor capacities of the brain reflect the integrated function of various neural systems. The processing of somatic sensory information (arising from receptors in the skin, subcutaneous tissues, and the musculoskeletal system that respond to physical deformation at the body surface or displacement of muscles and joints) provides a convenient example. These widely distributed structures that participate in generating somatic sensations are referred to as the somatic sensory system Two further principles of neural system organization are evident in the somatic sensory system: topographic organization and the prevalence of parallel pathways (see Parallel pathways refer to the segregation of nerve cell axons that process the distinct stimulus attributes that comprise a particular sensory, motor, or cognitive modality. For somatic sensation, the stimulus attributes relayed via parallel pathways are pain, temperature, touch, pressure, and proprioception (the sense of joint or limb position). From the dorsal root ganglia, through  the spinal cord and brainstem, and on to the somatic sensory cortex, these submodalities are kept largely segregated. Thus anatomically, biochemically, and physiologically distinct neurons transduce, encode, and relay pain, temperature, and mechanical information. Although this information is subsequently integrated to provide unitary perception of the relevant stimuli, neurons and circuits in the somatic sensory system are clearly specialized to process discrete aspects of somatic sensation.This basic outline of the organization of the somatic system is representative of the principles pertinent to understanding any neural system. It will in every case be pertinent to consider the anatomical distribution of neural circuits dedicated to a particular function, how the function is represented or "mapped" onto the neural elements within the system, and how distinct stimulus attributes are segregated within subsets of neurons that comprise the system. Such details provide a framework for understanding how activity within the system provides a representation of relevant stimulus, the required motor response, and higher order cognitive correlates. A wide range of physiological methods is now available to evaluate the electrical (and metabolic) activity of the neuronal circuits that make up a neural system. Two approaches, however, have been particularly useful in defining how neural systems represent information. The most widely used method is single-cell, or single-unit electrophysiological recording with microelectrodes (see above; this method often records from several nearby cells in addition to the one selected, providing further useful information). The use of microelectrodes to record action potential activity provides a cell-by-cell analysis of the organization topographic maps The second major area in which remarkable technical advances have been made is functional brain imaging in human subjects (and to a lesser extent animals), which has revolutionized the functional understanding of neural systems over the last two decades (Box A). Unlike electrical methods of recording neural activity, which are invasive in the sense of having to expose the brain and insert electrodes into it, functional imaging is noninvasive and thus applicable to both patients and normal human subjects. Moreover, functional imaging allows the simultaneous evaluation of multiple brain structures (which is possible but obviously difficult with electrical recording methods). The tasks that can be evaluated with functional imaging permit a far more ambitious and integrative approach to studying the operations of a neural system.Over the last 20 years, these noninvasive methods have allowed neuroscientists to evaluate the representation of an enormous number of complex human behaviors, and at the same time have provided diagnostic tools that are used more and more routinely. Many of the resulting observations have confirmed inferences about functional localization and the organization of neural systems that were originally based on the study of neurological patients who exhibited altered behavior after stroke or other forms of brain injury. Others findings, however, have given new insights into the way neural systems function in the human brain.Many of the most widely heralded advances in modern neuroscience have involved reducing the complexity of the brain to more readily analyzed components-i.e., genes, molecules, or cells. Nevertheless, the brain functions as a whole, and the study of more complex (and, some might argue, more interesting) brain functions such as perception, language, emotion, memory, and consciousness remain a central challenge for contemporary neuroscientists. In recognition of this challenge, over the last 20 years or so a field called cognitive neuroscience has emerged that is specifically devoted to understanding these issues (see Unit V). This evolution has also rejuvenated the field of neuroethology (which is devoted to observing complex behaviors of animals in their native environments-for example, social communication in birds and non-human primates), and has encouraged the development of tasks to better evaluate the genesis of complex behaviors in human subjects. When used in combination with functional imaging, well designed behavioral tasks can facilitate identification of brain networks devoted to specific complex functions, including language skills, mathematical and musical ability, emotional responses, aesthetic judgments, and abstract thinking. Carefully constructed behavioral tasks can also be used to study the pathology of complex brain diseases that compromise cognition, such Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, and depression.In short, new or revitalized efforts to study higher brain functions with increasingly powerful techniques offer ways of beginning to understand even the most complex aspects of human behavior.In the 1970s, computerized tomography, or CT, opened a new era in noninvasive imaging by introducing the use of computer processing technology to help probe the living brain. Prior to CT, the only brain imaging technique available was standard X-ray film, which has poor soft tissue contrast and involves relatively high radiation exposure.The CT approach uses a narrow X-ray beam and a row of very sensitive detectors placed on opposite sides of the head to probe just a small portion of tissue at a time with limited radiation exposure (see Brain imaging took another large step forward in the 1980s with the development of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI is based on the fact that the nuclei of some atoms act as spinning magnets, and that if they are placed in a strong magnetic field they will line up with the field and spin at a frequency that is dependent on the field strength. If they then receive a brief radiofrequency pulse tuned to their spinning frequency they are knocked out of alignment with the field, and subsequently emit energy in an oscillatory fashion as they gradually realign themselves with the field. The strength of the emitted signal depends on how many nuclei are involved in this process. To get spatial information in MRI, the magnetic field is distorted slightly by imposing magnetic gradients along three different spatial axes so that only nuclei at certain locations are tuned to the detector's frequency at any given time. Almost all MRI scanners use detectors tuned to the radio frequencies of spinning hydrogen nuclei in water molecules, and thus create images based on the distribution of water in different tissues. Careful manipulation of magnetic field gradients and radiofrequency pulses make it possible to construct extraordinarily detailed images of the brain at any location and orientation with sub-millimeter resolution.The strong magnetic field and radiofrequency pulses used in MRI scanning are harmless, making this technique completely noninvasive (although metal objects in or near a scanner are a safety concern) (see Imaging functional variations in the living brain has also become possible with the recent development of techniques for detecting small, localized X-ray source X-ray detector (A) In computerized tomography, the X-ray source and detectors are moved around the patient's head. The inset shows a horizontal CT section of a normal adult brain.(continued)The brain can be studied by methods that range from genetics and molecular biology to behavioral testing of normal human subjects. In addition to an ever-increasing store of knowledge about the anatomical organization of the nervous system, many of the brightest successes of modern neuroscience have come from understanding nerve cells as the basic structural and functional unit of the nervous system. Studies of the distinct cellular architecture and molecular components of neurons and glia have revealed much aboutBrain Imaging Techniques changes in metabolism or cerebral blood flow. To conserve energy, the brain regulates its blood flow such that active neurons with relatively high metabolic demands receive more blood than relatively inactive neurons. Detecting and mapping these local changes in cerebral blood flow forms the basis for three widely used functional brain imaging techniques: positron emission tomography (PET), single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT), and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). In PET scanning, unstable positronemitting isotopes are incorporated into different reagents (including water, precursor molecules of specific neurotransmitters, or glucose) and injected into the bloodstream. Labeled oxygen and glucose quickly accumulate in more metabolically active areas, and labeled transmitter probes are taken up selectively by appropriate regions. As the unstable isotope decays, it results in the emission of two positrons moving in opposite directions. Gamma ray detectors placed around the head register a "hit" only when two detectors 180°apart react simultaneously. Images of tissue isotope density can then be generated (much the way CT images are calculated) showing the location of active regions with a spatial resolution of about 4 mm. Depending on the probe injected, PET imaging can be used to visualize activity-dependent changes in blood flow, tissue metabolism, or biochemical activity. SPECT imaging is similar to PET in that it involves injection or inhalation of a radiolabeled compound (for example, Functional MRI, a variant of MRI, currently offers the best approach for visualizing brain function based on local metabolism. fMRI is predicated on the fact that hemoglobin in blood slightly distorts the magnetic resonance properties of hydrogen nuclei in its vicinity, and (B) In MRI scanning, the head is placed in the center of a large magnet. A radiofrequency antenna coil is placed around the head for exciting and recording the magnetic resonance signal. For fMRI, stimuli can be presented using virtual reality video goggles and stereo headphones while inside the scanner. their individual functions, as well as providing a basis for understanding how nerve cells are organized into circuits, and circuits into systems that process specific types of information pertinent to perception and action. Goals that remain include understanding how basic molecular genetic phenomena are linked to cellular, circuit, and system functions; understanding how these processes go awry in neurological and psychiatric diseases; and beginning to understand the especially complex functions of the brain that make us human.the amount of magnetic distortion changes depending on whether the hemoglobin has oxygen bound to it. When a brain area is activated by a specific task it begins to use more oxygen and within seconds the brain microvasculature responds by increasing the flow of oxygen-rich blood to the active area. These changes in the concentration of oxygen and blood flow lead to localized blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) changes in the magnetic resonance signal. Such fluctuations are detected using statistical image processing techniques to produce maps of taskdependent brain function (see Sylvius for Neuroscience:The brain is remarkably adept at acquiring, coordinating, and disseminating information about the body and its environment. Such information must be processed within milliseconds, yet it also can be stored away as memories that endure for years. Neurons within the central and peripheral nervous systems perform these functions by generating sophisticated electrical and chemical signals. This unit describes these signals and how they are produced. It explains how one type of electrical signal, the action potential, allows information to travel along the length of a nerve cell. It also explains how other types of signals-both electrical and chemical-are generated at synaptic connections between nerve cells. Synapses permit information transfer by interconnecting neurons to form the circuitry on which neural processing depends. Finally, it describes the intricate biochemical signaling events that take place within neurons. Appreciating these fundamental forms of neuronal signaling provides a foundation for appreciating the higher-level functions considered in the rest of the book.The cellular and molecular mechanisms that give neurons their unique signaling abilities are also targets for disease processes that compromise the function of the nervous system. A working knowledge of the cellular and molecular biology of neurons is therefore fundamental to understanding a variety of brain pathologies, and for developing novel approaches to diagnosing and treating these all too prevalent problems.