Nerve cells generate electrical signals that transmit information. Although neurons are not intrinsically good conductors of electricity, they have evolved elaborate mechanisms for generating these signals based on the flow of ions across their plasma membranes. Ordinarily, neurons generate a negative potential, called the resting membrane potential, that can be measured by recording the voltage between the inside and outside of nerve cells. The action potential transiently abolishes the negative resting potential and makes the transmembrane potential positive. Action potentials are propagated along the length of axons and are the fundamental signal that carries information from one place to another in the nervous system. Still other types of electrical signals are produced by the activation of synaptic contacts between neurons or by the actions of external forms of energy on sensory neurons. All of these electrical signals arise from ion fluxes brought about by nerve cell membranes being selectively permeable to different ions, and from the non-uniform distribution of these ions across the membrane.Neurons employ several different types of electrical signal to encode and transfer information. The best way to observe these signals is to use an intracellular microelectrode to measure the electrical potential across the neuronal plasma membrane. A typical microelectrode is a piece of glass tubing pulled to a very fine point and filled with a good electrical conductor, such as a concentrated salt solution. This conductive core can then be connected to a voltmeter, such as an oscilloscope, to record the transmembrane voltage of the nerve cell.The first type of electrical phenomenon can be observed as soon as a microelectrode is inserted through the membrane of the neuron. Upon entering the cell, the microelectrode reports a negative potential, indicating that neurons have a means of generating a constant voltage across their membranes when at rest. This voltage, called the resting membrane potential, depends on the type of neuron being examined, but it is always a fraction of a volt The electrical signals produced by neurons are caused by responses to stimuli, which then change the resting membrane potential. Receptor potentials are due to the activation of sensory neurons by external stimuli, such as light, sound, or heat. For example, touching the skin activates Pacinian corpuscles, receptor neurons that sense mechanical disturbances of the skin. These neurons respond to touch with a receptor potential that changes the resting potential for a fraction of a second Electrical Signals of Nerve Cells changes in potential are the first step in generating the sensation of vibrations of the skin in the somatic sensory system. Similar sorts of receptor potentials are observed in all other sensory neurons during transduction of sensory signals.Another type of electrical signal is associated with communication between neurons at synaptic contacts. Activation of these synapses generates synaptic potentials, which allow transmission of information from one neuron to another. An example of such a signal is shown in The use of electrical signals-as in sending electricity over wires to provide power or information-presents a series of problems in electrical engineering. A fundamental problem for neurons is that their axons, which can be quite long, are not good electrical conductors. Although neurons and wires are both capable of passively conducting electricity, the electrical properties of neurons compare poorly to an ordinary wire. To compensate for this deficiency, neurons have evolved a "booster system" that allows them to conduct electrical signals over great distances despite their intrinsically poor electrical characteristics. The electrical signals produced by this booster system are called action potentials. An example of an action potential recorded from the axon of a spinal motor neuron is shown in One way to elicit an action potential is to pass electrical current across the membrane of the neuron. In normal circumstances, this current would be generated by receptor potentials or by synaptic potentials. In the laboratory, however, electrical current suitable for initiating an action potential can be readily produced by inserting a second microelectrode into the same neuron and then connecting the electrode to a battery The action potential, which is an active response generated by the neuron, is a brief change from negative to positive in the transmem- Two microelectrodes are inserted into a neuron one of these measures membrane potential while the other injects current into the neuron. Inserting the voltage-measuring microelectrode into the neuron reveals a negative potential, the resting membrane potential. Injecting current through the current-passing microelectrode alters the neuronal membrane potential. Hyperpolarizing current pulses produce only passive changes in the membrane potential. While small depolarizing currents also elict only passive responses, depolarizations that cause the membrane potential to meet or exceed threshold additionally evoke action potentials. Action potentials are active responses in the sense that they are generated by changes in the permeability of the neuronal membrane. Transporters create ion concentration differences by actively transporting ions against their chemical gradients. Channels take advantage of these concentration gradients, allowing selected ions to move, via diffusion, down their chemical gradients. brane potential. Importantly, the amplitude of the action potential is independent of the magnitude of the current used to evoke it that is, larger currents do not elicit larger action potentials. The action potentials of a given neuron are therefore said to be all-or-none, because they occur fully or not at all. If the amplitude or duration of the stimulus current is increased sufficiently, multiple action potentials occur, as can be seen in the responses to the three different current intensities shown in Because electrical signals are the basis of information transfer in the nervous system, it is essential to understand how these signals arise. Remarkably, all of the neuronal electrical signals described above are produced by similar mechanisms that rely upon the movement of ions across the neuronal membrane. The remainder of this chapter addresses the question of how nerve cells use ions to generate electrical potentials. Chapter 3 explores more specifically the means by which action potentials are produced and how these signals solve the problem of long-distance electrical conduction within nerve cells. Chapter 4 examines the properties of membrane molecules responsible for electrical signaling. Finally, Chapters 5-7 consider how electrical signals are transmitted from one nerve cell to another at synaptic contacts.Electrical potentials are generated across the membranes of neurons-and, indeed, all cells-because there are differences in the concentrations of specific ions across nerve cell membranes, and the membranes are selectively permeable to some of these ions. These two facts depend in turn on two different kinds of proteins in the cell membrane To appreciate the role of ion gradients and selective permeability in generating a membrane potential, consider a simple system in which an artificial membrane separates two compartments containing solutions of ions. In such a system, it is possible to determine the composition of the two solutions and, thereby, control the ion gradients across the membrane. For example, take the case of a membrane that is permeable only to potassium ions. If the concentration of K  on each side of this membrane is equal, then no electrical potential will be measured across it In the hypothetical case just described, an equilibrium will quickly be reached. As K  moves from compartment 1 to compartment 2 The electrical potential generated across the membrane at electrochemical equilibrium, the equilibrium potential, can be predicted by a simple formula called the Nernst equation. This relationship is generally expressed as where E X is the equilibrium potential for any ion X, R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, z is the valence of the permeant ion, and F is the Faraday constant. The brackets indicate the concentrations of ion X on each side of the membrane and the symbol ln indicates the natural logarithm of the concentration gradient. Because it is easier to perform calculations using base 10 logarithms and to perform experiments at room temperature, this relationship is usually simplified to where log indicates the base 10 logarithm of the concentration ratio. Thus, for the example in The equilibrium potential is conventionally defined in terms of the potential difference between the reference compartment, side 2 in the outside of the cell is the conventional reference point. Thus, when the concentration of K  is higher inside than out, an inside-negative potential is measured across the K  -permeable neuronal membrane.For a simple hypothetical system with only one permeant ion species, the Nernst equation allows the electrical potential across the membrane at equilibrium to be predicted exactly. For example, if the concentration of K  on side 1 is increased to 100 mM, the membrane potential will be -116 mV. More generally, if the membrane potential is plotted against the logarithm of the K  concentration gradient, the Nernst equation predicts a linear relationship with a slope of 58 mV per tenfold change in the K  gradient To reinforce and extend the concept of electrochemical equilibrium, consider some additional experiments on the influence of ionic species and ionic permeability that could be performed on the simple model system in The balance of chemical and electrical forces at equilibrium means that the electrical potential can determine ionic fluxes across the membrane, just as the ionic gradient can determine the membrane potential. To examine the influence of membrane potential on ionic flux, imagine connecting a battery across the two sides of the membrane to control the electrical potential across the membrane without changing the distribution of ions on the two sides. As long as the battery is off, things will be just as in The ability to alter ion flux experimentally by changing either the potential imposed on the membrane Now consider a somewhat more complex situation in which Na  and K  are unequally distributed across the membrane, as in Such an equation was developed by David Goldman in 1943. For the case most relevant to neurons, in which K  , Na  , and Cl -are the primary permeant ions, the Goldman equation is written where V is the voltage across the membrane and P indicates the permeability of the    With respect to neural signaling, it is particularly pertinent to ask what would happen if the membrane started out being permeable to K  , and then temporarily switched to become most permeable to Na  . In this circumstance, the membrane potential would start out at a negative level, become positive while the Na  permeability remained high, and then fall back to a negative level as the Na  permeability decreased again. As it turns out, this last case essentially describes what goes on in a neuron during the generation of an action potential. In the resting state, P K of the neuronal plasma membrane is much higher than P Na  since, as a result of the action of ion transporters, there is always more K  inside the cell than outside The action of ion transporters creates substantial transmembrane gradients for most ions. Once the ion concentration gradients across various neuronal membranes are known, the Nernst equation can be used to calculate the equilibrium potential for K  and other major ions. Since the resting membrane potential of the squid neuron is approximately -65 mV, K  is the ion that is closest to being in electrochemical equilibrium when the cell is at rest. This fact implies that the resting membrane is more permeable to K  than to the other ions listed in It is possible to test this guess, as Alan Hodgkin and Bernard Katz did in 1949, by asking what happens to the resting membrane potential if the concentration of K  outside the neuron is altered. If the resting membrane were permeable only to K  , then the Goldman equation predicts that the membrane potential will vary in proportion to the logarithm of the K  concentration gradient across the membrane. Assuming that the internal K  concentration is unchanged during the experiment, a plot of membrane potential against the logarithm of the external K  concentration should yield a straight line with a slope of 58 mV per tenfold change in external K  concentration at room temperature In summary, Hodgkin and Katz showed that the inside-negative resting potential arises because the membrane of the resting neuron is more permeable to K  than to any of the other ions present, and there is more K  inside the neuron than outside. The selective permeability to K  is caused by K  -permeable membrane channels that are open in resting neurons, and the The amplitude and rate of rise of the action potential diminish when external sodium concentration is reduced to onethird of normal, but recover when the Na  is replaced. While the amplitude of the action potential is quite sensitive to the external concentration of Na  , the resting membrane potential is little affected by changing the concentration of this ion. What causes the membrane potential of a neuron to depolarize during an action potential Although a general answer to this question has been given, it is well worth examining some of the experimental support for this concept. Given the data presented in Taking advantage of the same style of ion substitution experiment they used to assess the resting potential, Hodgkin and Katz tested the role of Na  in generating the action potential by asking what happens to the action potential when Na  is removed from the external medium. They found that lowering the external Na  concentration reduces both the rate of rise of the action potential and its peak amplitude The action potential of the squid giant axon has a characteristic shape, or waveform, with a number of different phases Although the waveform of the squid action potential is typical, the details of the action potential form vary widely from neuron to neuron in different animals. In myelinated axons of vertebrate motor neurons The variety of action potential waveforms could mean that each type of neuron has a different mechanism of action potential production. Fortunately, however, these diverse waveforms all result from relatively minor variations in the scheme used by the squid giant axon. For example, plateaus in the repolarization phase result from the presence of ion channels that are permeable to Ca 2 , and long-lasting undershoots result from the presence of additional types of membrane K  channels. The complex action potential of the Purkinje cell results from these extra features plus the fact that different types of action potentials are generated in various parts of the Purkinje neuron-cell body, dendrites, and axons-and are summed together in recordings from the cell body. Thus, the lessons learned from the squid axon are applicable to, and indeed essential for, understanding action potential generation in all neurons.  The time that the membrane potential lingers near E Na during the overshoot phase of an action potential is brief because the increased membrane permeability to Na  itself is short-lived. The membrane potential rapidly repolarizes to resting levels and is actually followed by a transient undershoot. As will be described in Chapter 3, these latter events in the action potential are due to an inactivation of the Na  permeability and an increase in the K  permeability of the membrane. During the undershoot, the membrane potential is transiently hyperpolarized because K  permeability becomes even greater than it is at rest. The action potential ends when this phase of enhanced K  permeability subsides, and the membrane potential thus returns to its normal resting level.The ion substitution experiments carried out by Hodgkin and Katz provided convincing evidence that the resting membrane potential results from a high resting membrane permeability to K  , and that depolarization during an action potential results from a transient rise in membrane Na  permeability. Although these experiments identified the ions that flow during an action potential, they did not establish how the neuronal membrane is able to change its ionic permeability to generate the action potential, or what mechanisms trigger this critical change. The next chapter addresses these issues, documenting the surprising conclusion that the neuronal membrane potential itself affects membrane permeability.Nerve cells generate electrical signals to convey information over substantial distances and to transmit it to other cells by means of synaptic connections. These signals ultimately depend on changes in the resting electrical potential across the neuronal membrane. A resting potential occurs because nerve cell membranes are permeable to one or more ion species subject to an electrochemical gradient. More specifically, a negative membrane potential at rest results from a net efflux of K  across neuronal membranes that are predominantly permeable to K  . In contrast, an action potential occurs when a transient rise in Na  permeability allows a net flow of Na  in the opposite direction across the membrane that is now predominantly permeable to Na  . The brief rise in membrane Na  permeability is followed by a secondary, transient rise in membrane K  permeability that repolarizes the neuronal membrane and produces a brief undershoot of the action potential. As a result of these processes, the membrane is depolarized in an all-or-none fashion during an action potential. When these active permeability changes subside, the membrane potential returns to its resting level because of the high resting membrane permeability to K  .  The action potential, the primary electrical signal generated by nerve cells, reflects changes in membrane permeability to specific ions. Present understanding of these changes in ionic permeability is based on evidence obtained by the voltage clamp technique, which permits detailed characterization of permeability changes as a function of membrane potential and time. For most types of axons, these changes consist of a rapid and transient rise in sodium permeability, followed by a slower but more prolonged rise in potassium permeability. Both permeabilities are voltage-dependent, increasing as the membrane potential depolarizes. The kinetics and voltage dependence of Na  and K  permeabilities provide a complete explanation of action potential generation. Depolarizing the membrane potential to the threshold level causes a rapid, self-sustaining increase in Na  permeability that produces the rising phase of the action potential however, the Na  permeability increase is short-lived and is followed by a slower increase in K  permeability that restores the membrane potential to its usual negative resting level. A mathematical model that describes the behavior of these ionic permeabilities predicts virtually all of the observed properties of action potentials. Importantly, this same ionic mechanism permits action potentials to be propagated along the length of neuronal axons, explaining how electrical signals are conveyed throughout the nervous system.The previous chapter introduced the idea that nerve cells generate electrical signals by virtue of a membrane that is differentially permeable to various ion species. In particular, a transient increase in the permeability of the neuronal membrane to Na  initiates the action potential. This chapter considers exactly how this increase in Na  permeability occurs. A key to understanding this phenomenon is the observation that action potentials are initiated only when the neuronal membrane potential becomes more positive than a threshold level. This observation suggests that the mechanism responsible for the increase in Na  permeability is sensitive to the membrane potential. Therefore, if one could understand how a change in membrane potential activates Na  permeability, it should be possible to explain how action potentials are generated.The fact that the Na  permeability that generates the membrane potential change is itself sensitive to the membrane potential presents both conceptual and practical obstacles to studying the mechanism of the action potential. A practical problem is the difficulty of systematically varying the membrane Chapter 3VoltageDependent Membrane Permeability potential to study the permeability change, because such changes in membrane potential will produce an action potential, which causes further, uncontrolled changes in the membrane potential. Historically, then, it was not really possible to understand action potentials until a technique was developed that allowed experimenters to control membrane potential and simultaneously measure the underlying permeability changes. This tech-Breakthroughs in scientific research often rely on the development of new technologies. In the case of the action potential, detailed understanding came only after of the invention of the voltage clamp technique by Kenneth Cole in the 1940s. This device is called a voltage clamp because it controls, or clamps, membrane potential at any level desired by the experimenter. The method measures the membrane potential with a microelectrode placed inside the cell, and electronically compares this voltage to the voltage to be maintained. The clamp circuitry then passes a current back into the cell though another intracellular electrode. This electronic feedback circuit holds the membrane potential at the desired level, even in the face of permeability changes that would normally alter the membrane potential. Most importantly, the device permits the simultaneous measurement of the current needed to keep the cell at a given voltage. This current is exactly equal to the amount of current flowing across the neuronal membrane, allowing direct measurement of these membrane currents. Therefore, the voltage clamp technique can indicate how membrane potential influences ionic current flow across the membrane. This information gave Hodgkin and Huxley the key insights that led to their model for action potential generation.Today, the voltage clamp method remains widely used to study ionic currents in neurons and other cells. The most popular contemporary version of this approach is the patch clamp technique, a method that can be applied to virtually any cell and has a resolution high enough to measure the minute electrical currents flowing through single ion channels. nique, the voltage clamp method, provides the information needed to define the ionic permeability of the membrane at any level of membrane potential.In the late 1940s, Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley working at the University of Cambridge used the voltage clamp technique to work out the permeability changes underlying the action potential. They again chose to use the giant neuron of the squid because its large size allowed insertion of the electrodes necessary for voltage clamping. They were the first investigators to test directly the hypothesis that potential-sensitive Na  and K  permeability changes are both necessary and sufficient for the production of action potentials.Hodgkin and Huxleys first goal was to determine whether neuronal membranes do, in fact, have voltage-dependent permeabilities. To address this issue, they asked whether ionic currents flow across the membrane when its potential is changed. The result of one such experiment is shown in The results shown in An even more demanding way to test whether Na  carries the early inward current is to examine the behavior of this current after removing external Na  . Removing the Na  outside the axon makes E Na negative if the permeability to Na  is increased under these conditions, current should flow outward as Na  leaves the neuron, due to the reversed electrochemical gradient. When Hodgkin and Huxley performed this experiment, they obtained the result shown in Notice that removal of external Na  in the experiment shown in Taken together, these experiments using the voltage clamp show that changing the membrane potential to a level more positive than the resting potential produces two effects: an early influx of Na  into the neuron, followed by a delayed efflux of K  . The early influx of Na  produces a transient inward current, whereas the delayed efflux of K  produces a sustained outward current. The differences in the time course and ionic selectivity of the two fluxes suggest that two different ionic permeability mechanisms are activated by changes in membrane potential. Confirmation that there are indeed two distinct mechanisms has come from pharmacological studies of drugs that specifically affect these two currents Early current is inward again Na  -free The next goal Hodgkin and Huxley set for themselves was to describe Na  and K  permeability changes mathematically. To do this, they assumed that the ionic currents are due to a change in membrane conductance, defined as the reciprocal of the membrane resistance. Membrane conductance is thus closely related, although not identical, to membrane permeability. When evaluating ionic movements from an electrical standpoint, it is convenient to describe them in terms of ionic conductances rather than ionic permeabilities. For present purposes, permeability and conductance can be considered synonymous. If membrane conductance obeys Ohms Law, then the ionic current that flows during an increase in membrane conductance is given bywhere I ion is the ionic current, V m is the membrane potential, and E ion is the equilibrium potential for the ion flowing through the conductance, g ion . The difference between V m and E ion is the electrochemical driving force acting on the ion.Hodgkin and Huxley used this simple relationship to calculate the dependence of Na  and K  conductances on time and membrane potential. They knew V m , which was set by their voltage clamp device All told, the voltage clamp experiments carried out by Hodgkin and Huxley showed that the ionic currents that flow when the neuronal membrane is depolarized are due to three different voltage-sensitive processes: activation of Na  conductance, activation of K  conductance, and inactivation of Na  conductance.From their experimental measurements, Hodgkin and Huxley were able to construct a detailed mathematical model of the Na  and K  conductance changes. The goal of these modeling efforts was to determine whether the Na  and K  conductances alone are sufficient to produce an action potential. Using this information, they could in fact generate the form and time course of the action potential with remarkable accuracy The Hodgkin-Huxley model also provided many insights into how action potentials are generated. Hodgkin and Huxleys reconstruction of the action potential and all its features shows that the properties of the voltage-sensitive Na  and K  conductances, together with the electrochemical driving forces created by ion transporters, are sufficient to explain action potentials. Their use of both empirical and theoretical methods brought an unprecedented level of rigor to a long-standing problem, setting a standard of proof that is achieved only rarely in biological research.The voltage-dependent mechanisms of action potential generation also explain the long-distance transmission of these electrical signals. Recall from Chapter 2 that neurons are relatively poor conductors of electricity, at least compared to a wire. Current conduction by wires, and by neurons in the absence of action potentials, is called passive current flow. The passive electrical properties of a nerve cell axon can be determined by measuring the voltage change resulting from a current pulse passed across the axonal membrane An important-and potentially puzzling-property of the action potential is its initiation at a particular membrane potential, called threshold. Indeed, action potentials never occur without a depolarizing stimulus that brings the membrane to this level. The depolarizing "trigger" can be one of several events: a synaptic input, a receptor potential generated by specialized receptor organs, the endogenous pacemaker activity of cells that generate action potentials spontaneously, or the local current that mediates the spread of the action potential down the axon. Why the action potential "takes off" at a particular level of depolarization can be understood by comparing the underlying events to a chemical explosion The threshold of action potential initiation is, in principle, similar Because the Na  and K  conductances change dynamically over time, the threshold potential for producing an action potential also varies as a consequence of the previous activity of the neuron. For example, following an action potential, the membrane becomes temporarily refractory to further excitation because the threshold for firing an action potential transiently rises. There is, therefore, no specific value of membrane potential that defines the threshold for a given nerve cell in all circumstances. If the experiment shown in How, then, do action potentials traverse great distances along such a poor passive conductor The answer is in part provided by the observation that the amplitude of the action potentials recorded at different distances is constant. This all-or-none behavior indicates that more than simple passive flow of current must be involved in action potential propagation. A second clue comes from examination of the time of occurrence of the action potentials recorded at different distances from the site of stimulation: Action potentials occur later and later at greater distances along the axon The mechanism of action potential propagation is easy to grasp once one understands how action potentials are generated and how current passively flows along an axon The passive flow of electrical current plays a central role in action potential propagation, synaptic transmission, and all other forms of electrical signaling in nerve cells. Therefore, it is worthwhile understanding in quantitative terms how passive current flow varies with distance along a neuron. For the case of a cylindrical axon, such as the one depicted in where V x is the voltage response at any distance x along the axon, V 0 is the voltage change at the point where current is injected into the axon, e is the base of natural logarithms, and  is the length constant of the axon. As evident in this relationship, the length constant is the distance where the initial voltage response decays to 1e of its value. The length constant is thus a way to characterize how far passive current flow spreads before it leaks out of the axon, with leakier axons having shorter length constants.The length constant depends upon the physical properties of the axon, in particular the relative resistances of the plasma membrane, the intracellular axoplasm, and the extracellular medium. The relationship between these parameters is:Hence, to improve the passive flow of current along an axon, the resistance of the plasma membrane should be as high as possible and the resistances of the axoplasm and extracellular medium should be low.Another important consequence of the passive properties of neurons is that currents flowing across a membrane do not immediately change the membrane potential. For example, when a rectangular current pulse is injected into the axon shown in the experiment illustrated in Recall that the depolarization that produces Na  channel opening also causes delayed activation of K  channels and Na  channel inactivation, lead-brane behaves as a capacitor, storing the initial charge that flows at the beginning and end of the current pulse. For the case of a cell whose membrane potential is spatially uniform, the change in the membrane potential at any time, V t , after beginning the current pulse where V  is the steady-state value of the membrane potential change, t is the time after the current pulse begins, and  is the membrane time constant. The time constant is thus defined as the time when the voltage response rises to 1  of V  . After the current pulse ends, the membrane potential change also declines exponentially according to the relationshipDuring this decay, the membrane potential returns to 1e of V  at a time equal to t. For cells with more complex geometries than the axon in Time course of potential changes produced in a spatially uniform cell by a current pulse. The rise and fall of the membrane potential can be described as exponential functions, with the time constant  defining the time required for the response to rise to 1 - of the steady-state value, or to decline to 1e of V  .  Purves Neuroscience 3E Pyramis StudiosFigure 3.12 Action potential conduction requires both active and passive current flow. Depolarization opens Na  channels locally and produces an action potential at point A of the axon. The resulting inward current flows passively along the axon, depolarizing the adjacent region of the axon. At a later time, the depolarization of the adjacent membrane has opened Na  channels at point B, resulting in the initiation of the action potential at this site and additional inward current that again spreads passively to an adjacent point farther along the axon. At a still later time, the action potential has propagated even farther. This cycle continues along the full length of the axon. Note that as the action potential spreads, the membrane potential repolarizes due to K  channel opening and Na  channel inactivation, leaving a "wake" of refractoriness behind the action potential that prevents its backward propagation. The panel to the left of this figure legend shows the time course of membrane potential changes at the points indicated.ing to repolarization of the membrane potential as the action potential sweeps along the length of an axon The rate of action potential conduction limits the flow of information within the nervous system. It is not surprising, then, that various mechanisms have evolved to optimize the propagation of action potentials along axons. Because action potential conduction requires passive and active flow of current The action potential and all its complex properties can be explained by timeand voltage-dependent changes in the Na  and K  permeabilities of neuronal membranes. This conclusion derives primarily from evidence obtained by a device called the voltage clamp. The voltage clamp technique is an electronic feedback method that allows control of neuronal membrane potential  Multiple sclerosis is a disease of the central nervous system characterized by a variety of clinical problems arising from multiple regions of demyelination and inflammation along axonal pathways. The disorder commonly begins between ages 20 and 40, characterized by the abrupt onset of neurological deficits that typically persist for days or weeks and then remit. The clinical course ranges from patients with no persistent neurological loss, some of whom experience only occasional later exacerbations, to others who progressively deteriorate as a result of extensive and relentless central nervous system involvement.The signs and symptoms of MS are determined by the location of the affected regions. Particularly common are monocular blindness, motor weakness or paralysis, abnormal somatic sensations, double vision, and dizziness. Abnormalities are often apparent in the cerebrospinal fluid, which usually contains an abnormal number of cells associated with inflammation and an increased content of antibodies. The diagnosis of MS generally relies on the presence of a neurological problem that remits and then returns at an unrelated site. Confirmation can sometimes be obtained from magnetic resonance imaging, or functional evidence of lesions in a particular pathway by abnormal evoked potentials. The histological hallmark of MS at postmortem exam is multiple lesions at different sites showing loss of myelin associated with infiltration of inflammatory cells and, in some instances, loss of axons themselves.The concept of MS as a demyelinating disease is deeply embedded in the clinical literature, although precisely how the demyelination translates into functional deficits is poorly understood. The loss of the myelin sheath surrounding many axons clearly compromises action potential conduction, and the abnormal patterns of nerve conduction that result presumably produce most of the clinical deficits in the disease. However, MS may have effects that extend beyond loss of the myelin sheath. It is clear that some axons are actually destroyed, probably as a result of inflammatory processes in the overlying myelin andor loss of trophic support of the axon by oligodendrocytes. Thus, axon loss also contributes to the functional deficits in MS, especially in the chronic, progressive forms of the disease.The ultimate cause of MS remains unclear. The immune system undoubtedly contributes to the damage and new immunoregulatory therapies provide substantial benefits to many patients. Precisely how the immune system is activated to cause the injury is not known. The most popular hypothesis is that MS is an autoimmune disease. The fact that immunization of experimental animals with any one of several molecular constituents of the myelin sheath can induce a demyelinating disease shows that an autoimmune attack on the myelin membrane is sufficient to produce a picture similar to MS. A possible explanation of the human disease is that a genetically susceptible individual becomes transiently infected with a microorganism that expresses a molecule structurally similar to a component of myelin. An immune response to this antigen is mounted to attack the invader, but the failure of the immune system to discriminate between the foreign protein and self results in destruction of otherwise normal myelin, a scenario occurring in mice infected with Theilers virus.An alternative hypothesis is that MS is caused by a persistent infection by a virus or other microorganism. In this interpretation, the immune systems ongoing efforts to get rid of the pathogen cause the damage to myelin. Tropical spastic paraparesis provides a precedent for this idea. TSP is a disease characterized by the gradual progression of weakness of the legs and impaired control of bladder function associated with increased deep tendon reflexes and a positive Babinski sign. This clinical picture is similar to that of rapidly advancing MS. TSP is known to be caused by persistent infection with a retrovirus. This precedent notwithstanding, proving the persistent viral infection hypothesis for MS requires unambiguous demonstration of the presence of a virus. Despite periodic reports of a virus associated with MS, convincing evidence has not been forthcoming. In sum, MS remains a daunting clinical challenge. and, simultaneously, direct measurement of the voltage-dependent fluxes of Na  and K  that produce the action potential. Voltage clamp experiments show that a transient rise in Na  conductance activates rapidly and then inactivates during a sustained depolarization of the membrane potential. Such experiments also demonstrate a rise in K  conductance that activates in a delayed fashion and, in contrast to the Na  conductance, does not inactivate. Mathematical modeling of the properties of these conductances indicates that they, and they alone, are responsible for the production of all-ornone action potentials in the squid axon. Action potentials propagate along the nerve cell axons initiated by the voltage gradient between the active and inactive regions of the axon by virtue of the local current flow. In this way, action potentials compensate for the relatively poor passive electrical properties of nerve cells and enable neural signaling over long distances. These classical electrophysiological findings provide a solid basis for considering the functional and ultimately molecular variations on neural signaling taken up in the next chapter.Voltage-Dependent Membrane Permeability 67The generation of electrical signals in neurons requires that plasma membranes establish concentration gradients for specific ions and that these membranes undergo rapid and selective changes in the membrane permeability to these ions. The membrane proteins that create and maintain ion gradients are called active transporters, whereas other proteins called ion channels give rise to selective ion permeability changes. As their name implies, ion channels are transmembrane proteins that contain a specialized structure, called a pore, that permits particular ions to cross the neuronal membrane. Some of these channels also contain other structures that are able to sense the electrical potential across the membrane. Such voltage-gated channels open or close in response to the magnitude of the membrane potential, allowing the membrane permeability to be regulated by changes in this potential. Other types of ion channels are gated by extracellular chemical signals such as neurotransmitters, and some by intracellular signals such as second messengers. Still others respond to mechanical stimuli, temperature changes, or a combination of such effects. Many types of ion channels have now been characterized at both the gene and protein level, resulting in the identification of a large number of ion channel subtypes that are expressed differentially in neuronal and non-neuronal cells. The specific expression pattern of ion channels in each cell type can generate a wide spectrum of electrical characteristics. In contrast to ion channels, active transporters are membrane proteins that produce and maintain ion concentration gradients. The most important of these is the Na  pump, which hydrolyzes ATP to regulate the intracellular concentrations of both Na  and K  . Other active transporters produce concentration gradients for the full range of physiologically important ions, including Cl -, Ca 2 , and H  . From the perspective of electrical signaling, active transporters and ion channels are complementary: Transporters create the concentration gradients that help drive ion fluxes through open ion channels, thus generating electrical signals.Although Hodgkin and Huxley had no knowledge of the physical nature of the conductance mechanisms underlying action potentials, they nonetheless proposed that nerve cell membranes have channels that allow ions to pass selectively from one side of the membrane to the other. Based on the ionic conductances and currents measured in voltage clamp experiments, the postulated channels had to have several properties. First, because the ionic currents are quite large, the channels had to be capable of allowing ions to move across the membrane at high rates. Second, becauseA wealth of new information about ion channels resulted from the invention of the patch clamp method in the 1970s. This technique is based on a very simple idea. A glass pipette with a very small opening is used to make tight contact with a tiny area, or patch, of neuronal membrane. After the application of a small amount of suction to the back of the pipette, the seal between pipette and membrane becomes so tight that no ions can flow between the pipette and the membrane. Thus, all the ions that flow when a single ion channel opens must flow into the pipette. The resulting electrical current, though small, can be measured with an ultrasensitive electronic amplifier connected to the pipette. Based on the geometry involved, this arrangement usually is called the cell-attached patch clamp recording method. As with the conventional voltage clamp method, the patch clamp method allows experimental control of the membrane potential to characterize the voltage dependence of membrane currents.Although the ability to record currents flowing through single ion channels is an important advantage of the cell-attached patch clamp method, minor technical modifications yield still other advantages. For example, if the membrane patch within the pipette is disrupted by briefly applying strong suction, the interior of the pipette becomes continuous with the cytoplasm of the cell. This arrangement allows measurements of electrical potentials and currents from the entire cell and is therefore called the whole-cell recording method. The whole-cell configuration also allows diffusional exchange between the pipette and the cytoplasm, producing a convenient way to inject substances into the interior of a "patched" cell.Two other variants of the patch clamp method originate from the finding that once a tight seal has formed between the membrane and the glass pipette, small pieces of membrane can be pulled away from the cell without disrupting the seal this yields a preparation that is free of the complications imposed by the rest of the cell. Simply retracting a pipette that is in the cell-attached configuration causes a small vesicle of membrane to remain attached to the pipette. By exposing the tip of the pipette to air, the vesicle opens to yield a small patch of membrane with its intracellular sur- Four configurations in patch clamp measurements of ionic currents.The Patch Clamp Method the ionic currents depend on the electrochemical gradient across the membrane, the channels had to make use of these gradients. Third, because Na  and K  flow across the membrane independently of each other, different channel types had to be capable of discriminating between Na  and K  , allowing only one of these ions to flow across the membrane under the relevant conditions. Finally, given that the conductances are voltage-dependent, the channels had to be able to sense the voltage drop across the membrane, opening only when the voltage reached appropriate levels. While this concept of channels was highly speculative in the 1950s, later experimental work established beyond any doubt that transmembrane proteins called voltage-sensitive ion channels indeed exist and are responsible for all of the ionic conductance phenomena described in Chapter 3.The first direct evidence for the presence of voltage-sensitive, ion-selective channels in nerve cell membranes came from measurements of the ionic currents flowing through individual ion channels. The voltage-clamp apparatus used by Hodgkin and Huxley could only resolve the aggregate current resulting from the flow of ions through many thousands of channels. A technique capable of measuring the currents flowing through single channels was devised in 1976 by Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann at the Max Planck Institute in Goettingen. This remarkable approach, called patch clamping, revolutionized the study of membrane currents. In particular, the patch clamp method provided the means to test directly Hodgkin and Huxleys proposals about the characteristics of ion channels.Currents flowing through Na  channels are best examined in experimental circumstances that prevent the flow of current through other types of channels that are present in the membrane. Under such conditions, depolarizing a patch of membrane from a squid giant axon causes tiny inward currents to flow, but only occasionally Channels and Transporters 71 face exposed. This arrangement, called the inside-out patch recording configuration, allows the measurement of singlechannel currents with the added benefit of making it possible to change the medium to which the intracellular surface of the membrane is exposed. Thus, the inside-out configuration is particularly valuable when studying the influence of intracellular molecules on ion channel function. Alternatively, if the pipette is retracted while it is in the whole-cell configuration, a membrane patch is produced that has its extracellular surface exposed. This arrangement, called the outside-out recording configuration, is optimal for studying how channel activity is influenced by extracellular chemical signals, such as neurotransmitters. This range of possible configurations makes the patch clamp method an unusually versatile technique for studies of ion channel function.Several observations further proved that the microscopic currents in Patch clamp experiments have also revealed the properties of the channels responsible for the macroscopic K  currents associated with action potentials. When the membrane potential is depolarized Molecular genetic studies, in conjunction with the patch clamp method and other techniques, have led to many additional advances in understanding ion channels. Genes encoding Na  and K  channels, as well as many other channel types, have now been identified and cloned. A surprising fact that has emerged from these molecular studies is the diversity of genes that code for ion channels. Well over 100 ion channel genes have now been discovered, a number that could not have been anticipated from early studies of ion channel function. To understand the functional significance of this multitude of ion channel genes, the channels can be selectively expressed in well-  When the potential is depolarized, voltage sensors allow the channel gates to open-first the Na  channels and then the K  channels. Na  channels also inactivate during prolonged depolarization, whereas many types of K  channels do not.defined experimental systems, such as in cultured cells or frog oocytes, and then studied with patch clamping and other physiological techniques. Such studies have found many voltage-gated channels that respond to membrane potential in much the same way as the Na  and K  channels that underlie the action potential. Other channels, however, are gated by chemical signals that bind to extracellular or intracellular domains on these proteins and are insensitive to membrane voltage. Still others are sensitive to mechanical displacement, or to changes in temperature.Further magnifying this diversity of ion channels are a number of mechanisms that can produce functionally different types of ion channels from a single gene. Ion channel genes contain a large number of coding regions that can be spliced together in different ways, giving rise to channel proteins that can have dramatically different functional properties. RNAs encoding ion channels also can be edited, modifying their base composition after transcription from the gene. For example, editing the RNA encoding of some receptors for the neurotransmitter glutamate changes a single amino acid within the receptor, which in turn gives rise to channels that differ in their selectivity for cations and in their conductance. Channel proteins can also undergo posttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation by protein kinases, which can further change their functional characteristics. Thus, although the basic electrical signals of the nervous system are relatively stereotyped, the proteins responsible for generating these signals are remarkably diverse, conferring specialized signaling properties to many of the neuronal cell types that populate the nervous system. These channels also are involved in a broad range of neurological diseases. Bridging the gap between the sequence of an ion channel gene and understanding channel function is a challenge. To meet this challenge, it is essential to have an experimental system in which the gene product can be expressed efficiently, and in which the function of the resulting channel can be studied with methods such as the patch clamp technique. Ideally, the vehicle for expression should be readily available, have few endogenous channels, and be large enough to permit mRNA and DNA to be microinjected with ease. Oocytes from the clawed African frog, Xenopus laevis As a result of these pioneering studies, heterologous expression experiments have now become a standard way of studying ion channels. The approach has been especially valuable in deciphering the relationship between channel structure and function. In such experiments, defined mutations are made in the part of the channel gene that encodes a structure of interest the resulting channel proteins are then expressed in oocytes to assess the functional consequences of the mutation.The ability to combine molecular and physiological methods in a single cell system has made Xenopus oocytes a powerful experimental tool. Indeed, this system has been as valuable to contemporary studies of voltage-gated ion channels as the squid axon was to such studies in the 1950s and 1960s. Voltage-gated ion channels that are selectively permeable to each of the major physiological ions-Na  , K  , Ca 2 , and Cl --have now been discovered Other electrical responses in neurons entail the activation of voltage-gated Ca 2 channels By far the largest and most diverse class of voltage-gated ion channels are the K  channels Many types of ion channels respond to chemical signals rather than to changes in the membrane potential Other ligand-gated channels are sensitive to chemical signals arising within the cytoplasm of neurons, and can be selective for specific ions such as K  or Cl -, or permeable to all physiological cations. Such channels are distinguised by ligand-binding domains on their intracellular surfaces that interact with second messengers such as Ca 2 , the cyclic nucleotides cAMP and cGMP, or protons. Examples of channels that respond to intracellular cues include Ca 2 -activated K  channels Still other ion channels respond to heat or membrane deformation. Heatactivated ion channels, such as some members of the transient receptor potential gene family, contribute to the sensations of pain and temperature and help mediate inflammation. These channels are often specialized to detect specific temperature ranges, and some are even activated by cold. Other ion channels respond to mechanical distortion of the plasma membrane and are the basis of stretch receptors and neuromuscular stretch reflexes Understanding the physical structure of ion channels is obviously the key to sorting out how they actually work. Until recently, most information about channel structure was derived indirectly from studies of the amino acid composition and physiological properties of these proteins. For example, a great deal has been learned by exploring the functions of particular amino acids within the proteins using mutagenesis and the expression of such channels in Xenopus oocytes. Such studies have discovered a general transmembrane architecture common to all the major ion channel families. Thus, these molecules are all integral membrane proteins that span the plasma membrane repeatedly. Na  channel proteins, consist of repeating motifs of 6 membrane-spanning regions that are repeated 4 times, for a total of 24 transmembrane regions Other imaginative mutagenesis experiments have provided information about how these proteins function. Two membrane-spanning domains of all ion channels appear to form a central pore through which ions can diffuse, and one of these domains contains a protein loop that confers an ability to selectivity allow certain ions to diffuse through the channel pore More recently, very direct information about the structural underpinnings of ion channel function has come from X-ray crystallography studies of bacterial K  channels 