The most common postsynaptic effect is indicated; the same transmitter can elicit postsynaptic excitation or inhibition depending on the nature of the ion channels affected by transmitter binding (see Chapter 7).transporter loads approximately 10,000 molecules of ACh into each cholinergic vesicle. In contrast to most other small-molecule neurotransmitters, the postsynaptic actions of ACh at many cholinergic synapses (the neuromuscular junction in particular) is not terminated by reuptake but by a powerful hydrolytic enzyme, acetylcholinesterase (AChE). This enzyme is concentrated in the synaptic cleft, ensuring a rapid decrease in ACh concentration after its release from the presynaptic terminal. AChE has a very high catalytic activity (about 5000 molecules of ACh per AChE molecule per second) and hydrolyzes ACh into acetate and choline. The choline produced by ACh hydrolysis is transported back into nerve terminals and used to resynthesize ACh.Among the many interesting drugs that interact with cholinergic enzymes are the organophosphates. This group includes some potent chemical warfare agents. One such compound is the nerve gas "Sarin," which was made notorious after a group of terrorists released this gas in Tokyo's underground rail system. Organophosphates can be lethal because they inhibit AChE, causing ACh to accumulate at cholinergic synapses. This build-up of ACh depolarizes the postsynaptic cell and renders it refractory to subsequent ACh release, causing neuromuscular paralysis and other effects. The high sensitivity of insects to these AChE inhibitors has made organophosphates popular insecticides.Many of the postsynaptic actions of ACh are mediated by the nicotinic ACh receptor (nAChR), so named because the CNS stimulant, nicotine, also  Each subunit of the nAChR molecule contains four transmembrane domains that make up the ion channel portion of the receptor, and a long extracellular region that makes up the ACh-binding domain Drug addiction is a chronic, relapsing disease with obvious medical, social, and political consequences. Addiction (also called substance dependence) is a persistent disorder of brain function in which compulsive drug use occurs despite serious negative consequences for the afflicted individual. The diagnostic manual of the American Psychiatric Association defines addiction in terms of both physical dependence and psychological dependence (in which an individual continues the drug-taking behavior despite obviously maladaptive consequences).The range of substances that can generate this sort of dependence is wide; the primary agents of abuse at present are opioids, cocaine, amphetamines, marijuana, alcohol, and nicotine. Addiction to more "socially acceptable" agents such as alcohol and nicotine are sometimes regarded as less problematic, but in fact involve medical and behavioral consequences that are at least as great as for drugs of abuse that are considered more dangerous. Importantly, the phenomenon of addiction is not limited to human behavior, but is demonstrable in laboratory animals. Most of these same agents are selfadministered if primates, rodents, or other species are provided with the opportunity to do so.In addition to a compulsion to take the agent of abuse, a major feature of addiction for many drugs is a constellation of negative physiological and emotional features, loosely referred to as "withdrawal syndrome," that occur when the drug is not taken. The signs and symptoms of withdrawal are different for each agent of abuse, but in general are characterized by effects opposite those of the positive experience induced by the drug itself. Consider, as an example, cocaine, a drug that was estimated to be in regular use by 5 to 6 million Americans during the decade of the 1990s, with about 600,000 regular users either addicted or at high risk for addiction. The positive effects of the drug smoked or inhaled as a powder in the form of the alkaloidal free base is a "high" that is nearly immediate but generally lasts only a few minutes, typically leading to a desire for additional drug in as little as 10 minutes to half an hour. The "high" is described as a feeling of well-being, self-confidence, and satisfaction. Conversely, when the drug is not available, frequent users experience depression, sleepiness, fatigue, drug-craving, and a general sense of malaise.Another aspect of addiction to cocaine or other agents is tolerance, defined as a reduction in the response to the drug upon repeated administration. Tolerance occurs as a consequence of persistent use of a number of drugs but is particularly significant in drug addiction, since it progressively increases the dose needed to experience the desired effects.Although it is fair to say that the neurobiology of addiction is incompletely understood, for cocaine and many other agents of abuse the addictive effects involve activation of dopamine receptors in critical brain regions involved in motivation and emotional reinforcement (see Chapter 28). The most important of these areas is the midbrain dopamine system, A second class of ACh receptors is activated by muscarine, a poisonous alkaloid found in some mushrooms (see Box B), and thus they are referred to as muscarinic ACh receptors (mAChRs). mAChRs are metabotropic and mediate most of the effects of ACh in brain. Several subtypes of mAChR are known The most common opioid drug of abuse is heroin. Heroin is a derivative of the opium poppy and is not legally available for clinical purposes in the United States. The number of heroin addicts in the United States is estimated to be between 750,000 and a million individuals. The positive feelings produced by heroin, generally described as the "rush," are often compared to the feeling of sexual orgasm and begin in less than a minute after intravenous injection. There is then a feeling of general well-being (referred to as "on the nod") that lasts about an hour. The symptoms of withdrawal can be intense; these are restlessness, irritability, nausea, muscle pain, depression, sleeplessness, and a sense of anxiety and malaise. The reinforcing aspects of the drug entail the same dopaminergic circuitry in the ventral tegmental area and nucleus acumbens as does cocaine, although additional areas are certainly involved, particularly the sites of opioid receptors described in Chapter 9.Interestingly, addiction to heroin or any other agent is not an inevitable consequence of drug use, but depends critically on the environment. For instance, returning veterans who were heroin addicts in Vietnam typically lost their addiction upon returning to the United States. Likewise, patients given other opioids (e.g., morphine) for painful conditions rarely become addicts.The treatment of any form of addiction is difficult and must be tailored to the circumstances of the individual. In addition to treating acute problems of withdrawal and "detoxification," patterns of behavior must be changed that may take months or years. Addiction is thus a chronic disease state that requires continual monitoring during the lifetime of susceptible individuals. Poisonous plants and venomous animals are widespread in nature. The toxins they produce have been used for a variety of purposes, including hunting, healing, mind-altering, and, more recently, research. Many of these toxins have potent actions on the nervous system, often interfering with synaptic transmission by targeting neurotransmitter receptors. The poisons found in some organisms contain a single type of toxin, whereas others contain a mixture of tens or even hundreds of toxins.Given the central role of ACh receptors in mediating muscle contraction at neuromuscular junctions in numerous species, it is not surprising that a large number of natural toxins interfere with transmission at this synapse. In fact, the classification of nicotinic and muscarinic ACh receptors is based on the sensitivity of these receptors to the toxic plant alkaloids nicotine and muscarine, which activate nicotinic and muscarinic ACh receptors, respectively. Nicotine is derived from the dried leaves of the tobacco plant Nicotinia tabacum, and muscarine is from the poisonous red mushroom Amanita muscaria. Both toxins are stimulants that produce nausea, vomiting, mental confusion, and convulsions. Muscarine poisoning can also lead to circulatory collapse, coma, and death.The poison α-bungarotoxin, one of many peptides that together make up the venom of the banded krait, Bungarus multicinctus ( Another interesting class of animal toxins that selectively block nicotinic ACh and other receptors includes the peptides produced by fish-hunting marine cone snails ( Glutamate is the most important transmitter in normal brain function. Nearly all excitatory neurons in the central nervous system are glutamatergic, and it is estimated that over half of all brain synapses release this agent. Glutamate plays an especially important role in clinical neurology because elevated concentrations of extracellular glutamate, released as a result of neural injury, are toxic to neurons (Box D).Glutamate is a nonessential amino acid that does not cross the blood-brain barrier and therefore must be synthesized in neurons from local precursors. The most prevalent precursor for glutamate synthesis is glutamine, which is released by glial cells. Once released, glutamine is taken up into presynaptic receptors. The array of physiological responses produced by these peptides all serve to immobilize any prey unfortunate enough to encounter the cone snail. Many other organisms, including other mollusks, corals, worms and frogs, also utilize toxins containing specific blockers of ACh receptors.Other natural toxins have mind-or behavior-altering effects and in some cases have been used for thousands of years by shamans and, more recently, physicians. Two examples are plant alkaloid toxins that block muscarinic ACh receptors: atropine from deadly nightshade (belladonna), and scopolamine from henbane. Because these plants grow wild in many parts of the world, exposure is not unusual, and poisoning by either toxin can also be fatal.Another postsynaptic neurotoxin that, like nicotine, is used as a social drug is found in the seeds from the betel nut, Areca catechu ( Many other neurotoxins alter transmission at noncholinergic synapses. For example, amino acids found in certain mushrooms, algae, and seeds are potent glutamate receptor agonists. The excitotoxic amino acids kainate, from the red alga Digenea simplex, and quisqualate, from the seed of Quisqualis indica, are used to distinguish two families of non-NMDA glutamate receptors (see text). Other neurotoxic amino acid activators of glutamate receptors include ibotenic acid and acromelic acid, both found in mushrooms, and domoate, which occurs in algae, seaweed, and mussels. Another large group of peptide neurotoxins blocks glutamate receptors. These include the α-agatoxins from the funnel web spider, NSTX-3 from the orb weaver spider, jorotoxin from the Joro spider, and β-philanthotoxin from wasp venom, as well as many cone snail toxins.All the toxins discussed so far target excitatory synapses. The inhibitory GABA and glycine receptors, however, have not been overlooked by the exigencies of survival. Strychnine, an alkaloid extracted from the seeds of Strychnos nux-vomica, is the only drug known to have specific actions on transmission at glycinergic synapses. Because the toxin blocks glycine receptors, strychnine poisoning causes overactivity in the spinal cord and brainstem, leading to seizures. Strychnine has long been used commercially as a poison for rodents, although alternatives such as the anticoagulant coumadin are now more popular because they are safer for humans. Neurotoxins that block GABA A receptors include plant alkaloids such as bicuculline from Dutchman's breeches and picrotoxin from Anamerta cocculus. Dieldrin, a commercial insecticide, also blocks these receptors. These agents are, like strychnine, powerful central nervous system stimulants. Muscimol, a mushroom toxin that is a powerful depressant as well as a hallucinogen, activates GABA A receptors. A synthetic analogue of GABA, baclofen, is a GABA B agonist that reduces EPSPs in some brainstem neurons and is used clinically to reduce the frequency and severity of muscle spasms.Chemical warfare between species has thus given rise to a staggering array of molecules that target synapses throughout the nervous system. Although these toxins are designed to defeat normal synaptic transmission, they have also provided a set of powerful tools to understand postsynaptic mechanisms.terminals and metabolized to glutamate by the mitochondrial enzyme glutaminase The glutamate synthesized in the presynaptic cytoplasm is packaged into synaptic vesicles by transporters, termed VGLUT. At least three different VGLUT genes have been identified. Once released, glutamate is removed from the synaptic cleft by the excitatory amino acid transporters (EAATs). There are five different types of high-affinity glutamate transporters exist, some of which are present in glial cells and others in presynaptic terminals. Glutamate taken up by glial cells is converted into glutamine by the enzyme glutamine synthetase; glutamine is then transported out of the glial cells and into nerve terminals. In this way, synaptic terminals cooperate with glial cells to maintain an adequate supply of the neurotransmitter. This overall sequence of events is referred to as the glutamate-glutamine cycle (see Several types of glutamate receptors have been identified. Three of these are ionotropic receptors called, respectively, NMDA receptors, AMPA receptors, and kainate receptors A chance observation in the early 1970s led to the discovery of the underlying cause of these changes. Jim Patrick and Jon Lindstrom, then working at the Salk Institute, were attempting to raise antibodies to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors by immunizing rabbits with the receptors. Unexpectedly, the immunized rabbits developed muscle weakness that improved after treatment with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. Subsequent work showed that the blood of myasthenic patients contains antibodies directed against the acetylcholine receptor, and that these antibodies are present at neuromuscular synapses. Removal of antibodies by plasma exchange improves the weakness. Finally, injecting the serum of myasthenic patients into mice produces myasthenic effects (because the serum carries circulating antibodies).These   NMDA receptors have especially interesting properties ( Whereas some glutamatergic synapses have only AMPA or NMDA receptors, most possess both AMPA and NMDA receptors. An antagonist of NMDA receptors, APV (2-amino-5-phosphono-valerate), is often used to differentiate between the two receptor types. The use of this drug has also revealed differences between the EPSPs produced by NMDA and those produced by AMPA/kainate receptors, such as the fact that the synaptic currents produced by NMDA receptors are slower and longer-lasting than the those produced by AMPA/kainate receptors (see In addition to these ionotropic glutamate receptors, there are three types of metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluRs) Most inhibitory synapses in the brain and spinal cord use either γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) or glycine as neurotransmitters. Like glutamate, GABA was identified in brain tissue during the 1950s. The details of its synthesis and degradation were worked out shortly thereafter by the work of Ernst Florey and Eugene Roberts. During this era, David Curtis and Jeffrey Watkins first showed that GABA can inhibit action potential firing in mammalian neurons. Subsequent studies by Edward Kravitz and colleagues established that GABA serves as an inhibitory transmitter at lobster neuromuscular synapses. It is now known that as many as a third of the synapses in the brain use GABA as their inhibitory neurotransmitter. GABA is most commonly found in local circuit interneurons, although cerebellar Purkinje cells provide an example of a GABAergic projection neuron (see Chapter 18).The predominant precursor for GABA synthesis is glucose, which is metabolized to glutamate by the tricarboxylic acid cycle enzymes (pyruvate and glutamine can also act as precursors). The enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), which is found almost exclusively in GABAergic neurons, catalyzes the conversion of glutamate to GABA The mechanism of GABA removal is similar to that for glutamate: Both neurons and glia contain high-affinity transporters for GABA, termed GATs (several forms of GAT have been identified). Most GABA is eventually converted to succinate, which is metabolized further in the tricarboxylic acid cycle that mediates cellular ATP synthesis. The enzymes required for this degradation, GABA transaminase and succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase, are mitochondrial enzymes. Inhibition of GABA breakdown causes a rise in tissue GABA content and an increase in the activity of inhibitory neurons. There are also other pathways for degradation of GABA. The most noteworthy of these results in the production of γ-hydroxybutyrate, a GABA derivitive that has been abused as a "date rape" drug. Oral adminis- Figure 6.8 Synthesis, release, and reuptake of the inhibitory neurotransmitters GABA and glycine. (A) GABA is synthesized from glutamate by the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase, which requires pyridoxal phosphate. (B) Glycine can be synthesized by a number of metabolic pathways; in the brain, the major precursor is serine. High-affinity transporters terminate the actions of these transmitters and return GABA or glycine to the synaptic terminals for reuse, with both transmitters being loaded into synaptic vesicles via the vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter (VIATT).tration of γ-hydroxybutyrate can cause euphoria, memory deficits, and unconsciousness. Presumably these effects arise from actions on GABAergic synapses in the CNS.Inhibitory synapses employing GABA as their transmitter can exhibit three types of postsynaptic receptors, called GABA A , GABA B , and GABA C . GABA A and GABA C receptors are ionotropic receptors, while GABA B receptors are metabotropic. The ionotropic GABA receptors are usuallyExcitotoxicity refers to the ability of glutamate and related compounds to destroy neurons by prolonged excitatory synaptic transmission. Normally, the concentration of glutamate released into the synaptic cleft rises to high levels (approximately 1 mM), but it remains at this concentration for only a few milliseconds. If abnormally high levels of glutamate accumulate in the cleft, the excessive activation of neuronal glutamate receptors can literally excite neurons to death.The phenomenon of excitotoxicity was discovered in 1957 when D. R. Lucas and J. P. Newhouse serendipitously found that feeding sodium glutamate to infant mice destroys neurons in the retina. Roughly a decade later, John Olney at Washington University extended this discovery by showing that regions of glutamate-induced neuronal loss can occur throughout the brain. The damage was evidently restricted to the postsynaptic cells-the dendrites of the target neurons were grossly swollenwhile the presynaptic terminals were spared. Olney also examined the relative potency of glutamate analogs and found that their neurotoxic actions paralleled their ability to activate postsynaptic glutamate receptors. Furthermore, glutamate receptor antagonists were effective in blocking the neurotoxic effects of glutamate. In light of this evidence, Olney postulated that glutamate destroys neurons by a mechanism similar to transmission at excitatory glutamatergic synapses, and coined the term excitotoxic to refer to this pathological effect.Evidence that excitotoxicity is an important cause of neuronal damage after brain injury has come primarily from studying the consequences of reduced blood flow. The most common cause of reduced blood flow to the brain (ischemia) is the occlusion of a cerebral blood vessel (i.e., a stroke; see Appendix 3). The idea that excessive synaptic activity contributes to ischemic injury emerged from the observation that concentrations of glutamate and aspartate in the extracellular space around neurons increase during ischemia. Moreover, microinjection of glutamate receptor antagonists in experimental animals protects neurons from ischemia-induced damage. Together, these findings imply that extracellular accumulation of glutamate during ischemia activates glutamate receptors excessively, and that this somehow triggers a chain of events that leads to neuronal death. The reduced supply of oxygen and glucose presumably elevates extracellular glutamate levels by slowing the energy-dependent removal of glutamate at synapses.Excitotoxic mechanisms have now been shown to be involved in other acute forms of neuronal insult, including hypoglycemia, trauma, and repeated intense seizures (called status epilepticus). Understanding excitotoxicity therefore has important implications for treating a variety of neurological disorders. For instance, a blockade of glutamate receptors could, in principle, protect neurons from injury due to stroke, trauma, or other causes. Unfortunately, clinical trials of glutamate receptor antagonists have not led to much improvement in the outcome of stroke. The ineffectiveness of this quite logical treatment is probably due to several factors, one of which is that substantial excitotoxic injury occurs quite soon after ischemia, prior to the typical initiation of treatment. It is also likely that excitotoxicity is only one of several mechanisms by which ischemia damages neurons, other candidates including damage secondary to inflammation. Pharmacological interventions that target all these mechanisms nonetheless hold considerable promise for minimizing brain injury after stroke and other causes. inhibitory because their associated channels are permeable to Cl -( Metabotropic GABA receptors (GABA B ) are also widely distributed in brain. Like the ionotropic GABA A receptors, GABA B receptors are inhibitory. Rather than activating Cl − selective channels, however, GABA B -mediated inhibition is due to the activation of K + channels. A second mechanism for GABA B -mediated inhibition is by blocking Ca 2+ channels, which tends to hyperpolarize postsynaptic cells. Unlike most metabotropic receptors, GABA B receptors appear to assemble as heterodimers of GABA B R1 and R2 subunits. The distribution of the neutral amino acid glycine in the central nervous system is more localized than that of GABA. About half of the inhibitory synapses in the spinal cord use glycine; most other inhibitory synapses use GABA. Glycine is synthesized from serine by the mitochondrial isoform of serine hydroxymethyltransferase The receptors for glycine are also ligand-gated Cl -channels, their general structure mirroring that of the GABA A receptors. Glycine receptors are pentamers consisting of mixtures of the 4 gene products encoding glycine-binding α subunits, along with the accessory β subunit. Glycine receptors are potently blocked by strychnine, which may account for the toxic properties of this plant alkaloid (see Box B).Biogenic amine transmitters regulate many brain functions and are also active in the peripheral nervous system. Because biogenic amines are implicated in such a wide range of behaviors (ranging from central homeostatic functions to cognitive phenomena such as attention), it is not surprising that defects in biogenic amines function are implicated in most psychiatric disorders. The pharmacology of amine synapses is critically important in psychotherapy, with drugs affecting the synthesis, receptor binding, or catabolism of these neurotransmitters being among the most important agents in the armamentarium of modern pharmacology (Box E). Many drugs of abuse also act on biogenic amine pathways.There are five well-established biogenic amine neurotransmitters: the three catecholamines-dopamine, norepinephrine (noradrenaline), and epinephrine (adrenaline)-and histamine and serotonin (see • Dopamine is present in several brain regions The regulation of the biogenic amine neurotransmitters is altered in a variety of psychiatric disorders. Indeed, most psychotropic drugs (defined as drugs that alter behavior, mood, or perception) selectively affect one or more steps in the synthesis, packaging, or degradation of biogenic amines. Sorting out how these drugs work has been extremely useful in beginning to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying some of these diseases.Based on their effects on humans, psychotherapeutic drugs can be divided into several broad categories: antipsychotics, antianxiety drugs, antidepressants, and stimulants. The first antipsychotic drug used to ameliorate disorders such as schizophrenia was reserpine. Reserpine was developed in the 1950s and initially used as an antihypertensive agent; it blocks the uptake of norepinephrine into synaptic vesicles and therefore depletes the transmitter at aminergic terminals, diminishing the ability of the sympathetic division of the visceral motor system to cause vasoconstriction (see Chapter 20). A major side effect in hypertensive patients treated with reserpine-behavioral depression-suggested the possibility of using it as an antipsychotic agent in patients suffering from agitation and pathological anxiety. (Its ability to cause depression in mentally healthy individuals also suggested that aminergic transmitters are involved in mood disorders; see Box E in Chapter 28.)Although reserpine is no longer used as an antipsychotic agent, its initial success stimulated the development of antipsychotic drugs such as chlorpromazine, haloperidol, and benperidol, which over the last several decades have radically changed the approach to treating psychotic disorders. Prior to the discovery of these drugs, psychotic patients were typically hospitalized for long periods, sometimes indefinitely, and in the 1940s were subjected to desperate measures such as frontal lobotomy (see Box B in Chapter 25). Modern antipsychotic drugs now allow most patients to be treated on an outpatient basis after a brief hospital stay. Importantly, the clinical effectiveness of these drugs is correlated with their ability to block brain dopamine receptors, implying that activation of dopamine receptors contributes to some types of psychotic illness. A great deal of effort continues to be expended on developing more effective antipsychotic drugs with fewer side effects, and on discovering the mechanism and site of action of these medications.The second category of psychotherapeutic drugs is the antianxiety agents. Anxiety disorders are estimated to afflict 10-35% of the population, making them the most common psychiatric problem. The two major forms of pathological anxiety-panic attacks and generalized anxiety disorder-both respond to drugs that affect aminergic transmission. The agents used to treat panic disorders include inhibitors of the enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO inhibitors) required for the catabolism of the amine neurotransmitters, and blockers of serotonin receptors. The most effective drugs in treating generalized anxiety disorder have been benzodiazepines, such as chlordiazepoxide (Librium ® ), and diazepam (Valium ® ). In contrast to most other psychotherapeutic drugs, these agents increase the efficacy of transmission at GABA A synapses rather than acting at aminergic synapses.Antidepressants and stimulants also affect aminergic transmission. A large number of drugs are used clinically to treat depressive disorders. The three major classes of antidepressants-MAO inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and serotonin uptake blockers such as fluoxetine (Prozac ® ) and trazodone-all influence various aspects of aminergic transmission. MAO inhibitors such as phenelzine block the breakdown of amines, whereas the tricyclic antidepressants such as desipramine block the reuptake of norepinephrine and other amines. The extraordinarily popular antidepressant fluoxetine (Prozac ® ) selectively blocks the reuptake of serotonin without affecting the reuptake of catecholamines. Stimulants such as amphetamine are also used to treat some depressive disorders. Amphetamine stimulates the release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals; the transient "high" resulting from taking amphetamine may reflect the emotional opposite of the depression that sometimes follows reserpine-induced norepinephrine depletion.Despite the relatively small number of aminergic neurons in the brain, this litany of pharmacological actions emphasizes that these neurons are critically important in the maintenance of mental health. Dopamine is produced by the action of DOPA decarboxylase on DOPA (see Once released, dopamine acts exclusively by activating G-protein-coupled receptors. These are mainly dopamine-specific receptors, although β-adrenergic receptors also serve as important targets of norepinepherine and epinepherine (see below). Most dopamine receptor subtypes (see • Norepinephrine (also called noradrenaline) is used as a neurotransmitter in the locus coeruleus, a brainstem nucleus that projects diffusely to a variety of forebrain targets Norepinephrine synthesis requires dopamine β-hydroxylase, which catalyzes the production of norepinephrine from dopamine (see Norepinepherine, as well as epinephrine, acts on α-and β-adrenergic receptors • Epinephrine (also called adrenaline) is found in the brain at lower levels than the other catecholamines and also is present in fewer brain neurons than other catecholamines. Epinephrine-containing neurons in the central nervous system are primarily in the lateral tegmental system and in the medulla and project to the hypothalamus and thalamus The enzyme that synthesizes epinephrine, phenylethanolamine-Nmethyltransferase (see • Histamine is found in neurons in the hypothalamus that send sparse but widespread projections to almost all regions of the brain and spinal cord Histamine is produced from the amino acid histidine by a histidine decarboxylase There are three known types of histamine receptors, all of which are Gprotein-coupled receptors • Serotonin, or 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), was initially thought to increase vascular tone by virtue of its presence in serum (hence the name serotonin). Serotonin is found primarily in groups of neurons in the raphe region of the pons and upper brainstem, which have widespread projections to the forebrain (see 5-HT is synthesized from the amino acid tryptophan, which is an essential dietary requirement. Tryptophan is taken up into neurons by a plasma mem-  brane transporter and hydroxylated in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme tryptophan-5-hydroxylase Only one group of serotonin receptors, called the 5-HT 3 receptors, are ligand-gated ion channels (see Interestingly, all synaptic vesicles contain ATP, which is co-released with one or more "classical" neurotransmitters. This observation raises the possibility that ATP acts as a co-transmitter. It has been known since the 1920s that the extracellular application of ATP (or its breakdown products AMP and adenosine) can elicit electrical responses in neurons. The idea that some purines (so named because all these compounds contain a purine ring; see In accord with this evidence, receptors for both ATP and adenosine are widely distributed in the nervous system, as well as many other tissues. Three classes of these purinergic receptors are now known. One of these classes consists of ligand-gated ion channels (see Many peptides known to be hormones also act as neurotransmitters. Some peptide transmitters have been implicated in modulating emotions (see Chapter 28). Others, such as substance P and the opioid peptides, are involved in the perception of pain (see Chapter 9). Still other peptides, such as melanocyte-stimulating hormone, adrenocorticotropin, and β-endorphin, regulate complex responses to stress.The mechanisms responsible for the synthesis and packaging of peptide transmitters are fundamentally different from those used for the smallmolecule neurotransmitters and are much like the synthesis of proteins that are secreted from non-neuronal cells (pancreatic enzymes, for instance). Peptide-secreting neurons generally synthesize polypeptides in their cell bodies that are much larger than the final, "mature" peptide. Processing these polypeptides in their cell bodies, which are called pre-propeptides (or pre-proproteins), takes place by a sequence of reactions in several intracellular organelles. Pre-propeptides are synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum, where the signal sequence of amino acids-that is, the sequence indicating that the peptide is to be secreted-is removed. The remaining polypeptide, called a propeptide (or proprotein), then traverses the Golgi apparatus and is packaged into vesicles in the trans-Golgi network. The final stages of peptide neurotransmitter processing occur after packaging into vesicles and involve proteolytic cleavage, modification of the ends of the peptide, glycosylation, phosphorylation, and disulfide bond formation.Propeptide precursors are typically larger than their active peptide products and can give rise to more than one species of neuropeptide The biological activity of the peptide neurotransmitters depends on their amino acid sequence Substance P is an example of the first of these categories An especially important category of peptide neurotransmitters is the family of opioids Virtually all neuropeptides initiate their effects by activating G-proteincoupled receptors. The study of these metabotropic peptide receptors in the brain has been difficult because few specific agonists and antagonists are known. Peptides activate their receptors at low (nM to µM) concentrations compared to the concentrations required to activate receptors for small-molecule neurotransmitters. These properties allow the postsynaptic targets of peptides to be quite far removed from presynaptic terminals and to modulate the electrical properties of neurons that are simply in the vicinity of the site of peptide release. Neuropeptide receptor activation is especially important in regulating the postganglionic output from sympathetic ganglia and the activity of the gut (see Chapter 20). Peptide receptors, particularly the neuropeptide Y receptor, are also implicated in the initiation and maintenance of feeding behavior leading to satiety or obesity.Other behaviors ascribed to peptide receptor activation include anxiety and panic attacks, and antagonists of cholecystokinin receptors are clinically useful in the treatment of these afflictions. Other useful drugs have been developed by targeting the opiate receptors. Three well-defined opioid receptor subtypes (µ, δ, and κ) play a role in reward mechanisms as well as addiction. The µ-opiate receptor has been specifically identified as the primary site for drug reward mediated by opiate drugs In addition to the conventional neurotransmitters already described, some unusual molecules are also used for signaling between neurons and their targets. These chemical signals can be considered as neurotransmitters because of their roles in interneuronal signaling and because their release from neurons is regulated by Ca 2+ . However, they are unconventional, in comparison to other neurotransmitters, because they are not stored in synaptic vesicles and are not released from presynaptic terminals via exocytotic mechanisms. In fact, these unconventional neurotransmitters need not be released from presynaptic terminals at all and are often associated with "retrograde" signaling from postsynaptic cells back to presynaptic terminals.• Endocannabinoids are a family of related endogenous signals that interact with cannabinoid receptors. These receptors are the molecular targets of ∆ 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol, the psychoactive component of the marijuana plant, Cannabis (Box F). While some members of this emerging group of chemical signals remain to be determined, anandamide and 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG) have been established as endocannabinoids. These signals are unsaturated fatty acid with polar head groups and are produced by enzymatic degradation of membrane lipids ( At least two types of cannabinoid receptor have been identified, with most actions of endocannabinoids in the CNS mediated by the type termed CB1. CB1 is a G-protein-coupled receptor that is related to the metabotropic receptors for ACh, glutamate, and the other conventional neurotransmitters. Several compounds that are structurally related to endocannabinoids and that bind to the CB1 receptor have been synthesized (see Endocannabinoids participate in several forms of synaptic regulation. The best-documented action of these agents is to inhibit communication between postsynaptic target cells and their presynaptic inputs. In both the hippocampus and the cerebellum, among other regions, endocannabinoids serve as retrograde signals to regulate GABA release at certain inhibitory terminals. At such synapses, depolarization of the postsynaptic neuron causes a transient reduction in inhibitory postsynaptic responses Medicinal use of the marijuana plant, Cannabis sativa Understanding the brain mechanisms underlying the actions of marijuana was advanced by the discovery that a cannabinoid, ∆ 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC; Given that THC interacts with brain endocannabinoid receptors, particularly  potentially useful agent for coordinating the activities of multiple cells in a very localized region and may mediate certain forms of synaptic plasticity that spread within small networks of neurons. All of the known actions of NO are mediated within its cellular targets; for this reason, NO often is considered a second messenger rather than a neurotransmitter. Some of these actions of NO are due to the activation of the enzyme guanylyl cyclase, which then produces the second messenger cGMP within target cells (see Chapter 7). Other actions of NO are the result of covalent modification of target proteins via nitrosylation, the addition of a nitryl group to selected amino acids within the proteins. NO decays spontaneously by reacting with oxygen to produce inactive nitrogen oxides. As a result, NO signals last for only a short time, on the order of seconds or less. NO signaling evidently regulates a variety of synapses that also employ conventional neurotransmitters; so far, presynaptic terminals that release glutamate are the best-studied target of NO in the central nervous system. NO may also be involved in some neurological diseases. For example, it has been proposed that an imbalance between nitric oxide and superoxide generation underlies some neurodegenerative diseases.The complex synaptic computations occurring at neural circuits throughout the brain arise from the actions of a large number of neurotransmitters, which act on an even larger number of postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors. Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, whereas GABA and glycine are the major inhibitory neurotransmitters. The actions of these small-molecule neurotransmitters are typically faster than those of the neuropeptides. Thus, most small-molecule transmitters mediate synaptic transmission when a rapid response is essential, whereas the neuropeptide transmitters, as well as the biogenic amines and some small-molecule neurotransmitters, tend to modulate ongoing activity in the brain or in peripheral target tissues in a more gradual and ongoing way. Two broadly different families of neurotransmitter receptors have evolved to carry out the postsynaptic signaling actions of neurotransmitters. Ionotropic or ligandthe CB1 receptor, it is likely that such actions are responsible for the behavioral consequences of marijuana use. Indeed, many of the well-documented effects of marijuana are consistent with the distribution and actions of brain CB1 receptors. For example, marijuana effects on perception could be due to CB1 receptors in the neocortex, effects on psychomotor control due to endocannabinoid receptors in the basal ganglia and cerebellum, effects on shortterm memory due to cannabinoid receptors in the hippocampus, and the well-known effects of marijuana on stimulating appetite due to hypothalamic actions. While formal links between these behavioral consequences of marijuana and the underlying brain mechanisms are still being forged, studies of the actions of this drug have shed substantial light on basic synaptic mechanisms, which promise to further elucidate the mode of action of one of the world's most popular drugs.gated ion channels combine the neurotransmitter receptor and ion channel in one molecular entity, and therefore give rise to rapid postsynaptic electrical responses. Metabotropic receptors regulate the activity of postsynaptic ion channels indirectly, usually via G-proteins, and induce slower and longer-lasting electrical responses. Metabotropic receptors are especially important in regulating behavior, and drugs targeting these receptors have been clinically valuable in treating a wide range of behavioral disorders. The postsynaptic response at a given synapse is determined by the combination of receptor subtypes, G-protein subtypes, and ion channels that are expressed in the postsynaptic cell. Because each of these features can vary both within and among neurons, a tremendous diversity of transmittermediated effects is possible. Drugs that influence transmitter actions have enormous importance in the treatment of neurological and psychiatric disorders, as well as in a broad spectrum of other medical problems. As is apparent in the preceding chapters, electrical and chemical signaling mechanisms allow one nerve cell to receive and transmit information to another. This chapter focuses on the related events within neurons and other cells that are triggered by the interaction of a chemical signal with its receptor. This intracellular processing typically begins when extracellular chemical signals, such as neurotransmitters, hormones, and trophic factors, bind to specific receptors located either on the surface or within the cytoplasm or nucleus of the target cells. Such binding activates the receptors and in so doing stimulates cascades of intracellular reactions involving GTP-binding proteins, second messenger molecules, protein kinases, ion channels, and many other effector proteins whose modulation temporarily changes the physiological state of the target cell. These same intracellular signal transduction pathways can also cause longer-lasting changes by altering the transcription of genes, thus affecting the protein composition of the target cells on a more permanent basis. The large number of components involved in intracellular signaling pathways allows precise temporal and spatial control over the function of individual neurons, thereby allowing the coordination of electrical and chemical activity in the related populations of neurons that comprise neural circuits and systems.Chemical communication coordinates the behavior of individual nerve and glial cells in physiological processes that range from neural differentiation to learning and memory. Indeed, molecular signaling ultimately mediates and modulates all brain functions. To carry out such communication, a series of extraordinarily diverse and complex chemical signaling pathways has evolved. The preceding chapters have described in some detail the electrical signaling mechanisms that allow neurons to generate action potentials for conduction of information. These chapters also described synaptic transmission, a special form of chemical signaling that transfers information from one neuron to another. Chemical signaling is not, however, limited to synapses Chemical signaling of any sort requires three components: a molecular signal that transmits information from one cell to another, a receptor moleculethat transduces the information provided by the signal, and a target molecule that mediates the cellular response A general advantage of chemical signaling in both intercellular and intracellular contexts is signal amplification. Amplification occurs because individual signaling reactions can generate a much larger number of molecular products than the number of molecules that initiate the reaction. In the case of norepinephrine signaling, for example, a single norepinephrine molecule binding to its receptor can generate many thousands of second messenger molecules (such as cyclic AMP), yielding an amplification of tens of thousands of phosphates transferred to target proteins Another rationale for these complex signal transduction schemes is to permit precise control of cell behavior over a wide range of times. Some molecular interactions allow information to be transferred rapidly, while others are slower and longer lasting. For example, the signaling cascades associated with synaptic transmission at neuromuscular junctions allow a person to respond to rapidly changing cues, such as the trajectory of a pitched ball, while the slower responses triggered by adrenal medullary hormones (epinephrine and norepinephrine) secreted during a challenging game produce slower (and longer lasting) effects on muscle metabolism (see Chapter 20) and emotional state (see Chapter 29). To encode information that varies so widely over time, the concentration of the relevant signaling molecules must be carefully controlled. On one hand, the concentration of every signaling molecule within the signaling cascade must return to subthreshold values before the arrival of another stimulus. On the other hand, keeping the intermediates in a signaling pathway activated is critical for a sustained response. Having multiple levels of molecular interactions facilitates the intricate timing of these events.The molecular components of these signal transduction pathways are always activated by a chemical signaling molecule. Such signaling molecules can be grouped into three classes: cell-impermeant, cell-permeant, and cellassociated signaling molecules The third group of chemical signaling molecules, cell-associated signaling molecules, are arrayed on the extracellular surface of the plasma membrane. As a result, these molecules act only on other cells that are physically in contact with the cell that carries such signals. Examples include proteins such as the integrins and neural cell adhesion molecules (NCAMs) that influence axonal growth (see Chapter 22). Membrane-bound signaling molecules are more difficult to study, but are clearly important in neuronal development and other circumstances where physical contact between cells provides information about cellular identities.Regardless of the nature of the initiating signal, cellular responses are determined by the presence of receptors that specifically bind the signaling molecules. Binding of signal molecules causes a conformational change in the receptor, which then triggers the subsequent signaling cascade within the affected cell. Given that chemical signals can act either at the plasma membrane or within the cytoplasm (or nucleus) of the target cell, it is not surprising that receptors are actually found on both sides of the plasma membrane. The receptors for impermeant signal molecules are membranespanning proteins. The extracellular domain of such receptors includes the binding site for the signal, while the intracellular domain activates intracellular signaling cascades after the signal binds. A large number of these receptors have been identified and are grouped into families defined by the mechanism used to transduce signal binding into a cellular response Intracellular receptors are activated by cell-permeant or lipophilic signaling molecules Both G-protein-linked receptors and enzyme-linked receptors can activate biochemical reaction cascades that ultimately modify the function of target proteins. For both these receptor types, the coupling between receptor activation and their subsequent effects are the GTP-binding proteins. There are two general classes of GTP-binding protein The second class of GTP-binding proteins are monomeric G-proteins (also called small G-proteins). These monomeric GTPases also relay signals from activated cell surface receptors to intracellular targets such as the cytoskeleton and the vesicle trafficking apparatus of the cell. The first small G-protein was discovered in a virus that causes rat sarcoma tumors and was therefore called ras. Ras is a molecule that helps regulate cell differentiation and proliferation by relaying signals from receptor kinases to the nucleus; the viral form of ras is defective, which accounts for the ability of the virus to cause the uncontrolled cell proliferation that leads to tumors. Since then, a large number of small GTPases have been identified and can be sorted into five different subfamilies with different functions. For instance, some are involved in vesicle trafficking in the presynaptic terminal or elsewhere in the neuron, while others play a central role in protein and RNA trafficking in and out of the nucleus.Termination of signaling by both heterotrimeric and monomeric G-proteins is determined by hydrolysis of GTP to GDP. The rate of GTP hydrolysis is an important property of a particular G-protein that can be regulated by other proteins, termed GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). By replacing GTP with GDP, GAPs return G-proteins to their inactive form. GAPs were first recognized as regulators of small G-proteins, but recently similar proteins have been found to regulate the α subunits of heterotrimeric G-proteins. Hence, monomeric and trimeric G-proteins function as molecular timers that are active in their GTP-bound state, and become inactive when they have hydrolized the bound GTP to GDP Activated G-proteins alter the function of many downstream effectors. Most of these effectors are enzymes that produce intracellular second messengers. Effector enzymes include adenylyl cyclase, guanylyl cyclase, phospholipase C, and others As well as activating effector molecules, G-proteins can also directly bind to and activate ion channels. For example, some neurons, as well as heart muscle cells, have G-protein-coupled receptors that bind acetylcholine. Because these receptors are also activated by the agonist muscarine, they are usually called muscarinic receptors (see Chapters 6 and 20). Activation of muscarinic receptors can open K + channels, thereby inhibiting the rate at which the neuron fires action potentials, or slowing the heartbeat of muscle cells. These inhibitory responses are believed to be the result of βγ subunits of G-proteins binding to the K + channels. The activation of α subunits can also lead to the rapid closing of voltage-gated Ca 2+ and Na + channels. Because these channels carry inward currents involved in generating action potentials, closing them makes it more difficult for target cells to fire (see Chapters 3 and 4).In summary, the binding of chemical signals to their receptors activates cascades of signal transduction events in the cytosol of target cells. Within such cascades, G-proteins serve a pivotal function as the molecular transducing elements that couple membrane receptors to their molecular effectors within the cell. The diversity of G-proteins and their downstream targets leads to many types of physiological responses. By directly regulating the gating of ion channels, G-proteins can influence the membrane potential of target cells.Neurons use many different second messengers as intracellular signals. These messengers differ in the mechanism by which they are produced and removed, as well as their downstream targets and effects • Calcium. The calcium ion (Ca 2+ ) is perhaps the most common intracellular messenger in neurons. Indeed, few neuronal functions are immune to the influence-direct or indirect-of Ca 2+ . In all cases, information is transmitted by a transient rise in the cytoplasmic calcium concentration, which Ordinarily the concentration of Ca 2+ ions in the cytosol is extremely low, typically 50-100 nanomolar (10 -9 M). The concentration of Ca 2+ ions outside neurons-in the bloodstream or cerebrospinal fluid, for instance-is several orders of magnitude higher, typically several millimolar (10 -3 M). This steep Ca 2+ gradient is maintained by a number of mechanisms The Ca 2+ ions that act as intracellular signals enter cytosol by means of one or more types of Ca 2+ -permeable ion channels (see Chapter 4). These can be voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels or ligand-gated channels in the plasma membrane, both of which allow Ca 2+ to flow down the Ca 2+ gradient and into the cell from the extracellular medium. In addition, other channels allow Ca 2+ to be released from the interior of the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol. These intracellular Ca 2+ -releasing channels are gated, so they can be opened or closed in response to various intracellular signals. One such channel is the inositol trisphosphate (IP 3 ) receptor. As the name implies, these channels are regulated by IP 3 , a second messenger described in more detail below. A second type of intracellular Ca 2+ -releasing channel is the ryanodine receptor, named after a drug that binds to and partially opens these receptors. Among the biological signals that activate ryanodine receptors are cytoplasmic Ca 2+ and, at least in muscle cells, depolarization of the plasma membrane.These various mechanisms for elevating and removing Ca 2+ ions allow precise control of both the timing and location of Ca 2+ signaling within neurons, which in turn permit Ca 2+ to control many different signaling events. For example, voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels allow Ca 2+ concentrations to rise very rapidly and locally within presynaptic terminals to trigger neurotransmitter release, as already described in Chapter 5. Slower and more widespread rises in Ca 2+ concentration regulate a wide variety of other responses, including gene expression in the cell nucleus.• Cyclic nucleotides. Another important group of second messengers are the cyclic nucleotides, specifically cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) • Diacylglycerol and IP 3 . Remarkably, membrane lipids can also be converted into intracellular second messengers As already mentioned, second messengers typically regulate neuronal functions by modulating the phosphorylation state of intracellular proteins • cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). The primary effector of cAMP is the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). PKA is a tetrameric complex of two catalytic subunits and two inhibitory (regulatory) subunits. cAMP activates PKA by binding to the regulatory subunits and causing them to release active catalytic subunits. Such displacement of inhibitory domains is a general mechanism for activation of several protein kinases by second messengers • Ca 2+ /calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type II • Protein kinase C (PKC). Another important group of Ser/Thr protein kinases is protein kinase C (PKC). PKCs are diverse monomeric kinases activated by the second messengers DAG and Ca 2+ . DAG causes PKC to move from the cytosol to the plasma membrane, where it also binds Ca 2+ and phosphatidylserine, a membrane phospholipid • Protein tyrosine kinases. Two classes of protein kinases transfer phosphate groups to tyrosine residues on substrate proteins. Receptor tyrosine kinases are transmembrane proteins with an extracellular domain that binds to protein ligands (growth factors, neurotrophic factors, or cytokines) and an intracellular catalytic domain that phosphorylates the relevant substrate proteins. Non-receptor tyrosine kinases are cytoplasmic or membrane-associated enzymes that are indirectly activated by extracellular signals. Tyrosine phosphorylation is less common than Ser/Thr phosphorylation, and it often serves to recruit signaling molecules to the phosphorylated protein. kinases are particularly important for cell growth and differentiation (see Chapters 21 and 22).• Mitogen-activated protein kinase In summary, activation of membrane receptors can elicit complex cascades of enzyme activation, resulting in second messenger production and protein phosphorylation or dephosphorylation. These cytoplasmic signals produce a variety of rapid physiological responses by transiently regulating enzyme activity, ion channels, cytoskeletal proteins, and many other cellular processes. In addition, such signals can propagate to the nucleus to cause long-lasting changes in gene expression.Second messengers elicit prolonged changes in neuronal function by promoting the synthesis of new RNA and protein. The resulting accumulation of new proteins requires at least 30-60 minutes, a time frame that is orders of magnitude slower than the responses mediated by ion fluxes or phosphorylation. Likewise, the reversal of such events requires hours to days. In some cases, genetic "switches" can be thrown to permanently alter a neuron, as in neuronal differentiation (see Chapter 21).The amount of protein present in cells is determined primarily by the rate of transcription of DNA into RNA with the RNA polymerase complex or by interacting with other activator proteins that influence the polymerase.Intracellular signal transduction cascades regulate gene expression by converting transcriptional activator proteins from an inactive state to an active state in which they are able to bind to DNA. This conversion comes about in several ways. The key activator proteins and the mechanisms that allow them to regulate gene expression in response to signaling events are briefly summarized in the following sections.• CREB. The cAMP response element binding protein, usually abbreviated CREB, is a ubiquitous transcriptional activator siently raises intracellular calcium concentration. Such signaling cascades can potentiate CREB-mediated transcription by inhibiting a protein phosphatase that dephosphorylates CREB. CREB is thus an example of the convergence of multiple signaling pathways onto a single transcriptional activator.Many genes whose transcription is regulated by CREB have been identified. CREB-sensitive genes include the immediate early gene, c-fos (see below), the neurotrophin BDNF (see Chapter 22), the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (which is important for synthesis of catecholamine neurotransmitters; see Chapter 6), and many neuropeptides (including somatostatin, enkephalin, and corticotropin releasing hormone). CREB also is thought to mediate long-lasting changes in brain function. For example, CREB has been implicated in spatial learning, behavioral sensitization, long-term memory of odorant-conditioned behavior, and long-term synaptic plasticity (see Chapters 23 and 24).  