Figure 27.14 Summary scheme of sleep-wake states. In the waking state, activation is high, modulation is aminergic, and the information source is external. In REM sleep, activation is also high, the modulation is cholinergic, and the information source is internal. The other states can likewise be remembered in terms of this general diagram. Sleep apnea refers to a pattern of interrupted breathing during sleep that affects about 18 million Americans, most often obese, middle aged males. A person suffering from sleep apnea may wake up dozens or even hundreds of times during the night, with the result that they experience little or no slowwave sleep and spend less time in REM sleep It is not surprising that many drugs may affect sleep patterns the reason is that many neurotransmitters are involved in regulating the various states of sleep Because of the large number of people who suffer with sleep disorders, numerous drugs are available to treat these problems. One class of commonly used drugs is the benzodiapines. As shown in the figure, these drugs increase the time to onset of the deeper stages of sleep.Stimulant drugs that prevent sleep are also commonly used, especially caffeine, which is an adenosine receptor antagonist. als are continually tired and often suffer from depression that exacerbates the problem. In some high-risk individuals, sleep apnea may even lead to death from respiratory arrest. The underlying problem is that the airway in susceptible individuals collapses during breathing, thus blocking airflow. In normal sleep, breathing slows and muscle tone decreases throughout the body, including the tone of the pharynx. If the output of the brainstem circuitry regulating commands to the chest wall or to pharyngeal muscles is decreased sufficiently, or if the airway is compressed because of obesity, the pharynx tends to collapse as the muscles relax during the normal cycle of breathing. As a result, oxygen levels decrease and CO 2 levels rise. The rise in CO 2 reflexively causes inspiration, which tends to shift the individual from Stage I sleep to the waking state.A third sleep disorder is restless legs syndrome, a problem that affects about 12 million Americans. The characteristic of this syndrome is unpleasant crawling, prickling, or tingling sensations in one or both legs and feet, and an urge to move them about to obtain relief. These sensations occur when the person lies down or sits for prolonged periods of time. The result is constant leg movement during the day and fragmented sleep at night. The neurobiology of this problem is not understood. In mild cases, a hot bath, massaging the legs, or eliminating caffeine may alleviate the problem. In more severe cases, medications such as benzodiazepines may help.The best-understood sleep disorder is narcolepsy, a chronic disorder that affects about 250,000 people in the United States. It is the second leading cause of daytime drowsiness, ranking just behind sleep apnea. Individuals with narcolepsy have frequent "REM sleep attacks" during the day, in which they enter REM sleep from wakefulness without going through non-REM sleep. These "sleep attacks" can last from 30 seconds to 30 minutes or more. The onset of sleep in such individuals can be so abrupt that they fall down, with potentially disastrous consequences this phenomenon is called cataplexy, referring to a temporary loss of muscle control. Insights into the causes of narcolepsy have come from studies of dogs suffer-  All animals exhibit a restorative cycle of rest following activity, but only mammals divide the period of rest into distinct phases of non-REM and REM sleep. Why humans need a restorative phase of suspended consciousness accompanied by decreased metabolism and lowered body temperature is not known. Even more mysterious is why the human brain is periodically active during sleep at levels not appreciably different from the waking state. Despite the electroencephalographic similarities, the psychological states of wakefulness and REM sleep are obviously different. The highly organized sequence of human sleep states is actively generated by nuclei in the brainstem, most importantly the cholinergic nuclei of the pons-midbrain junction, the noradrenergic cells of the locus coeruleus, and the serotonergic neurons of the raphe nuclei. The activity of the relevant cell groups controls the degree of mental alertness on a continuum from deep sleep to waking attentiveness. These brainstem systems are in turn influenced by a circadian clocks located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and VLPO of the hypothalamus. The clock adjusts periods of sleep and wakefulness to appropriate durations during the 24-hour cycle of light and darkness that is fundamental to life on Earth.The subjective feelings and associated physiological states known as emotions are essential features of normal human experience. Moreover, some of the most devastating psychiatric problems involve emotional disorders. Although everyday emotions are as varied as happiness, surprise, anger, fear, and sadness, they share some common characteristics. All emotions are expressed through both visceral motor changes and stereotyped somatic motor responses, especially movements of the facial muscles. These responses accompany subjective experiences that are not easily described, but which are much the same in all human cultures. Because emotional expression is closely tied to the visceral motor system, it entails the activity of the central brain structures that govern preganglionic autonomic neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord. Historically, the higher order neural centers that coordinate emotional responses have been grouped under the rubric of the limbic system. More recently, however, several brain regions in addition to the classical limbic system have been shown to play a pivotal role in emotional processing, including the amygdala and several cortical areas in the orbital and medial aspects of the frontal lobe. This broader constellation of cortical and subcortical regions encompasses not only the central components of the visceral motor system but also regions in the forebrain and diencephalon that motivate lower motor neuronal pools concerned with the somatic expression of emotional behavior. Effectively, the concerted action of these diverse brain regions constitutes an emotional motor system. The same forebrain structures that process emotional signals participate in a variety of complex brain functions, including rational decision making, the interpretation and expression of social behavior, and even moral judgments.The most obvious signs of emotional arousal involve changes in the activity of the visceral motor system. Thus, increases or decreases in heart rate, cutaneous blood flow, piloerection, sweating, and gastrointestinal motility can all accompany various emotions. These responses are brought about by changes in activity in the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric components of the visceral motor system, which govern smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands throughout the body. As discussed in Chapter 20, Walter Cannon argued that intense activity of the sympathetic division of the visceral motor system prepares the animal to fully utilize metabolic and other resources in challenging or threatening situations. Conversely, activity of the parasympa-Emotions thetic division promotes a building up of metabolic reserves. Cannon further suggested that the natural opposition of the expenditure and storage of resources is reflected in a parallel opposition of the emotions associated with these different physiological states. As Cannon pointed out, "The desire for food and drink, the relish of taking them, all the pleasures of the table are naught in the presence of anger or great anxiety."Activation of the visceral motor system, particularly the sympathetic division, was long considered an all-or-nothing process. Once effective stimuli engaged the system, it was argued, a widespread discharge of all of its components ensued. More recent studies have shown that the responses of the autonomic nervous system are actually quite specific, with different patterns of activation characterizing different situations and their associated emotional states. Indeed, emotion-specific expressions produced voluntarily can elicit distinct patterns of autonomic activity. For example, if subjects are given muscle-by-muscle instructions that result in facial expressions recognizable as anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, or surprise without being told which emotion they are simulating, each pattern of facial muscle activity is accompanied by specific and reproducible differences in visceral motor activity. Moreover, autonomic responses are strongest when the facial expressions are judged to most closely resemble actual emotional expression and are often accompanied by the subjective experience of that emotion. One interpretation of these findings is that when voluntary facial expressions are produced, signals in the brain engage not only the motor cortex but also some of the circuits that produce emotional states. Perhaps this relationship helps explain how good actors can be so convincing. Nevertheless, we are quite adept at recognizing the difference between a contrived facial expression and the spontaneous smile that accompanies a pleasant emotional state.This evidence, along with many other observations, indicates that one source of emotion is sensory drive from muscles and internal organs. This input forms the sensory limb of reflex circuitry that allows rapid physiological changes in response to altered conditions. However, physiological responses can also be elicited by complex and idiosyncratic stimuli mediated by the forebrain. For example, an anticipated tryst with a lover, a suspenseful episode in a novel or film, stirring patriotic or religious music, or dishonest accusations can all lead to autonomic activation and strongly felt emotions. The neural activity evoked by such complex stimuli is relayed from the forebrain to visceral and somatic motor nuclei via the hypothalamus and brainstem reticular formation, the major structures that coordinate the expression of emotional behavior.In summary, emotion and sensorimotor behavior are inextricably linked. As William James put it more than a century ago:What kind of an emotion of fear would be left if the feeling neither of quickened heart-beats nor of shallow breathing, neither of trembling lips nor of weakened limbs, neither of goose-flesh nor of visceral stirrings, were present, it is quite impossible for me to think  I say that for us emotion dissociated from all bodily feeling is inconceivable.William James, 1893In 1928, Phillip Bard reported the results of a series of experiments that pointed to the hypothalamus as a critical center for coordination of both the The integrated emotional responses associated with "sham rage" survive removal of the cerebral hemispheres as long as the caudal hypothalamus remains intact. The routes by which the hypothalamus and other forebrain structures influence the visceral and somatic motor systems are complex. The major targets of the hypothalamus lie in the reticular formation, the tangled web of nerve cells and fibers in the core of the brainstem. This structure contains over 100 identifiable cell groups, including some of the nuclei that control the brain states associated with sleep and wakefulness described in the previous chapter. Other important circuits in the reticular formation control cardiovascular function, respiration, urination, vomiting, and swallowing. The reticular neurons receive hypothalamic input from and feed into both somatic and autonomic effector systems in the brainstem and spinal cord. Their activity can therefore produce widespread visceral motor and somatic motor responses, often overriding reflex function and sometimes involving almost every organ in the body.In addition to the hypothalamus, other sources of descending projections from the forebrain to the brainstem reticular formation contribute to the In 1862, the French neurologist and physiologist G.-B. Duchenne de Boulogne published a remarkable treatise on facial expressions. His work was the first to systematically examine the contributions of small groups of cranial muscles to the expressions that communicate the richness of human emotion. Duchenne reasoned that "one would be able, like nature herself, to paint the expressive lines of the emotions of the soul on the face of man." In so doing, he sought to understand how the coordinated contractions of groups of muscles express distinct, pan-cultural emotional states. To achieve this goal, he pioneered the use of transcutaneous electrical stimulation to activate single muscles and small groups of muscles in the face, dorsal surface of the head, and neck. Duchenne also documented the faces of his subjects with another technological innovation: photography In normal individuals, such as the Parisian shoemaker illustrated in Studies of patients with specific neurological injury to these separate descending systems of control have further differentiated the forebrain centers responsible for control of the muscles of facial expression  Duchenne and one of his subjects undergoing "faradization" of the muscles of facial expression. Bilateral electrical stimulation of the zygomaticus major mimicked a genuine expression of happiness, although closer examination shows insufficient contraction of the obicularis oculi compared to spontaneous laughter. Stimulation of the brow and neck produced an expression of "terror mixed with pain, torture  that of the damned" however, the subject reported no discomfort or emotional experience consistent with the evoked contractions.individuals produce symmetrical involuntary facial movements when they laugh, frown, or cry in response to amusing or distressing stimuli. In such patients, pathways from regions of the forebrain other than the classical motor cortex in the posterior frontal lobe remain available to activate facial movements in response to stimuli with emotional significance. A much less common form of neurological injury, called emotional facial paresis, demonstrates the opposite set of impairments, i.e., loss of the ability to express emotions by using the muscles of the face without loss of volitional control Descending "pyramidal" and "extrapyramidal" projections from motor cortex and brainstemDescending "extrapyramidal" projections from medial forebrain and hypothalamus In spontaneous response to a humorous comment, however, the right side of the patients face fails to express emotion.expression of emotional behavior. Collectively, these additional centers in the forebrain are considered part of the limbic system, which is described in the following section. These descending influences on the expression of somatic and visceral motor behavior arise outside of the classic motor cortical areas in the posterior frontal lobe.Somatic motor system  Visceral motor systemDescending "pyramidal" and "extrapyramidal" projections from motor cortex and brainstemDescending "extrapyramidal"projections from "limbic" centers of ventral-medial forebrain and hypothalamus Thus, the descending control of emotional expression entails two parallel systems that are anatomically and functionally distinct In short, the somatic and visceral activities associated with unified emotional behavior are mediated by the activity of both the somatic and visceral motor neurons, which integrate parallel, descending inputs from a constellation of forebrain sources. The remaining sections of the chapter are devoted to the organization and function of the forebrain centers that specifically govern the experience and expression of emotional behavior.Attempts to understand the effector systems that control emotional behavior have a long history. In 1937, James Papez first proposed that specific brain circuits are devoted to emotional experience and expression. In seeking to understand what parts of the brain serve this function, he began to explore Emotions 693 the medial aspects of the cerebral hemisphere. In the 1850s, Paul Broca used the term "limbic lobe" to refer to the part of the cerebral cortex that forms a rim around the corpus callosum and diencephalon on the medial face of the hemispheres For many years, these structures, along with the olfactory bulbs, were thought to be concerned primarily with the sense of smell. Indeed, Broca considered the olfactory bulbs to be the principal source of input to the limbic lobe. Papez, however, speculated that the function of the limbic lobe might be more related to emotions. He knew from the work of Bard and Hess that the hypothalamus influences the expression of emotion he also knew, as everyone does, that emotions reach consciousness, and that higher cognitive functions affect emotional behavior. Ultimately, Papez showed that the cingulate cortex and hypothalamus are interconnected via projections from the mammillary bodies to the anterior nucleus of the dorsal thalamus, which projects in turn to the cingulate gyrus. The cingulate gyrus projects to the hippocampus. Finally, he showed that the hippocampus projects via the fornix back to the hypothalamus. Papez suggested that these pathways provided the connections necessary for cortical control of emotional expression, and they became known as the "Papez circuit."Over time, the concept of a forebrain circuit for the control of emotional expression, first elaborated by Papez, has been revised to include parts of the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex, ventral parts of the basal ganglia, the mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus, and a large nuclear mass in the temporal lobe anterior to the hippocampus, called the amygdala. This set of structures, together with the parahippocampal gyrus and cingulate cortex, is generally referred to as the limbic system About the same time that Papez proposed that these structures were important for the integration of emotional behavior, Heinrich Klver and Paul Bucy were carrying out a series of experiments on rhesus monkeys in which they removed a large part of both medial temporal lobes, thus destroying much of the limbic system. They reported a set of abnormal behaviors in these animals that is now known as the Klver-Bucy syndrome. Among the most prominent changes was visual agnosia: the animals appeared to be unable to recognize objects, although they were not blind, a deficit similar to that sometimes seen in human patients following lesions of the temporal cortex. In addition, the monkeys displayed bizarre oral behaviors. For instance, these animals would put objects into their mouths that normal monkeys would not. They exhibited hyperactivity and hypersexuality, approaching and making physical contact with The amygdala is a complex mass of gray matter buried in the anterior-medial portion of the temporal lobe, just rostral to the hippocampus Physiological studies have confirmed this convergence of sensory information. Thus, many neurons in the amygdala respond to visual, auditory, somatic virtually anything in their environment most importantly, they showed marked changes in emotional behavior. Because they had been caught in the wild, the monkeys had typically reacted with hostility and fear to humans before their surgery. Postoperatively, however, they were virtually tame. Motor and vocal reactions generally associated with anger or fear were no longer elicited by the approach of humans, and the animals showed little or no excitement when the experimenters handled them. Nor did they show fear when presented with a snake-a strongly aversive stimulus for a normal rhesus monkey. Klver and Bucy concluded that this remarkable change in behavior was at least partly due to the interruption of the pathways described by Papez. A similar syndrome has been described in humans who have suffered bilateral damage of the temporal lobes.When it was later demonstrated that the emotional disturbances of the Klver-Bucy syndrome could be elicited by removal of the amygdala alone, attention turned more specifically to the role of this structure in the control of emotional behavior.Experiments first performed in the late 1950s by John Downer at University College London vividly demonstrated the importance of the amygdala in aggressive behavior. Downer removed one amygdala in rhesus monkeys, at Emotions 697 sensory, visceral sensory, gustatory, and olfactory stimuli. Moreover, highly complex stimuli are often required to evoke a neuronal response. For example, there are neurons in the basal-lateral group of nuclei that respond selectively to the sight of faces, very much like the "face" neurons in the inferior temporal cortex.In addition to sensory inputs, the prefrontal and temporal cortical connections of the amygdala give it access to more overtly cognitive neocortical circuits, which integrate the emotional significance of sensory stimuli and guide complex behavior.Finally, projections from the amygdala to the hypothalamus and brainstem allow it to play an important role in the expression of emotional behavior by influencing activity in both the somatic and visceral motor efferent systems. Orbital and medial prefrontal cortexMediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus The amygdala participates in a "triangular" circuit linking the amygdala, the thalamic mediodorsal nucleus, and the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex. These complex interconnections allow direct interactions between the amygdala and prefrontal cortex, as well as indirect modulation via the circuitry of the ventral basal ganglia.the same time transecting the optic chiasm and the commissures that link the two hemispheres. In so doing, he produced animals with a single amygdala that had access only to visual inputs from the eye on the same side of the head. Downer found that the animals behavior depended on which eye was used to view the world. When the monkeys were allowed to see with the eye on the side of amygdala lesion, they behaved in some respects like those described by Klver and Bucy for example, they were relatively placid in the presence of humans. If, however, they were allowed to see only with the eye on the side of the intact amygdala, they reverted to their normal fearful and often aggressive behavior. Thus, in the absence of the amygdala, a monkey does not interpret the significance of the visual stimulus presented by an approaching human in the same way as a normal animal. Importantly, only visual stimuli presented to the eye on the side of the ablation produced this abnormal state thus if the animal was touched on either side, a full aggressive reaction occurred, implying that somatic sensory information about both sides of the body had access to the remaining amygdala. These anecdotal data, taken together with what is now a rich trove of empirical results and clinical observations in both experimental animals and humans show that the amygdala mediates neural processes that invest sensory experience with emotional significance.The Reasoning Behind an Important Discovery Paul Bucy explains why he and Heinrich Klver removed the temporal lobes in monkeys:When we started out, we were not trying to find out what removal of the temporal lobe would do, or what changes in behavior of the monkeys it would produce. What we found out was completely unexpected Heinrich had been experimenting with mescaline. He had even taken it himself and had experienced hallucinations. He had written a book about mescaline and its effects. Later Heinrich gave mescaline to his monkeys. He gave everything to his monkeys, even his lunch He noticed that the monkeys acted as though they experienced paraesthesias in their lips. They licked, bit and chewed their lips. So he came to me and said, "Maybe we can find out where mescaline has its actions in the brain." So I said, "OK."We began by doing a sensory denervation of the face, but that didnt make any difference to the mescaline-induced behavior. So we tried motor denervation. That didnt make any difference, either. Then we had to sit back and think hard about where to look. I said to Heinrich, "This business of licking and chewing the lips is not unlike what you see in cases of temporal lobe epilepsy. Patients chew and smack their lips inordinately. So, lets take out the uncus." Well, we could just as well take out the whole temporal lobe, including the uncus. So we did.We were especially fortunate with our first animal. This was an older female. She had become vicious-absolutely nasty. She was the most vicious animal you ever saw it was dangerous to go near her. If she didnt hurt you, she would at least tear your clothing. She was the first animal on which we operated. I removed one temporal lobe. The next morning my phone was ringing like mad. It was Heinrich, who asked, "Paul, what did you do to my monkey She is tame" Subsequently, in operating on non-vicious animals, the taming effect was never so obvious.That stimulated our getting the other temporal lobe out as soon as we could evaluate her. When we removed the other temporal lobe, the whole syndrome blossomed. To better understand the role of the amygdala in evaluating stimuli, and to define more precisely the specific circuits and mechanisms involved, several other animal models of emotional behavior have since been developed. One of the most useful is based on conditioned fear responses in rats. Conditioned fear develops when an initially neutral stimulus is repeatedly paired with an inherently aversive one. Over time, the animal begins to respond to the neutral stimulus with behaviors similar to those elicited by the threatening stimulus. Studies of the parts of the brain involved in the development of conditioned fear in rats have begun to shed some light on this process. Joseph LeDoux and his colleagues at New York University trained rats to associate a tone with a mildly aversive foot shock delivered shortly after onset of the sound. To assess the animals responses, they measured blood pressure and the length of time the animals crouched without moving. Before training, the rats did not react to the tone, nor did their blood pressure change when the tone was presented. After training, however, the onset of the tone caused a marked increase in blood pressure and prolonged periods of behavioral freezing. Using this paradigm, LeDoux and his collegues worked out the neural circuitry that established the association between the tone and fear Figure 28.6 Model of associative learning in the amygdala relevant to emotional function. Most neutral sensory inputs are relayed to principal neurons in the amygdala by projections from "higher order" sensory processing areas that represent objects. If these sensory inputs depolarize amygdalar neurons at the same time as inputs that represent other sensations with primary reinforcing value, then associative learning occurs by strengthening synaptic linkages between the previously neutral inputs and the neurons of the amygdala. The output of the amygdala then informs a variety of integrative centers responsible for the somatic and visceral motor expression of emotion, and for modifying behavior relevant to seeking rewards and avoiding punishment. Since the amygdala is a site where neural activity produced by both tones and shocks can be processed, it is reasonable to suppose that the amygdala is also the site where learning about fearful stimuli occurs. These results, among others, have led to the broader hypothesis that the amygdala participates in establishing associations between neutral sensory stimuli, such as a mild auditory tone or the sight of inanimate object in the environment, and other stimuli that have some primary reinforcement value Neutral sensory stimuliHypothalamus and brainstem Visceral motor effector systems to prepare body for actionOrbital and medial prefrontal cortex Implicit motor actions Explicit conscious processing to obtain rewards, avoid punishers and implement long-term plan Learning Learning Learning Learning communicated centrally via the special sensory afferent systems, or internal stimuli derived from activation of visceral sensory receptors. The stimuli with primary reinforcement value include sensory stimuli that are inherently rewarding, such as the sight, smell, and taste of food, or stimuli with negative valences such as an aversive taste, loud sounds, or painful mechanical stimulation. The associative learning process itself is probably a Hebbianlike mechanism that strengthens the connections relaying the information about the neutral stimulus, provided that they activate the postsynaptic neurons in the amygdala at the same time as inputs pertaining to the primary reinforcer. The discovery that long-term potentiation occurs in the amygdala provides further support for this hypothesis. Indeed, the acquisition of conditioned fear in rats is blocked by infusion into the amygdala of NMDA antagonists, which prevents the induction of LTP. Finally, the behavior of patients with selective damage to the anteriormedial temporal lobe indicates that the amygdala plays a similar role in the human experience of fear.As these observations on the limbic system make plain, understanding the neural basis of emotions also requires understanding the role of the cerebral cortex. In animals like the rat, most behavioral responses are highly stereotyped. In more complex brains, however, individual experience is increasingly influential in determining responses to special and even idiosyncratic stimuli. Thus in humans, a stimulus that evokes fear or sadness in one person may have little or no effect on the emotions of another. Although the pathways underlying such responses are not well understood, the amygdala and its interconnections with an array of neocortical areas in the prefrontal cortex and anterior temporal lobe, as well as several subcortical structures, appear to be especially important in the higher order processing of emotion. In addition to its connections with the hypothalamus and brainstem centers that regulate visceral motor function, the amygdala has significant connections with several cortical areas in the orbital and medial aspects of the frontal lobe. These cortical fields associate information from every sensory modality and can thus integrate a variety of inputs pertinent to moment-to-moment experience. In addition, the amygdala projects to the thalamus, which projects in turn to these same cortical areas. Finally, the amygdala innervates neurons in the ventral portions of the basal ganglia that receive the major cortico-striatal projections from the regions of the prefrontal cortex thought to process emotions. Considering all these seemingly arcane anatomical connections, the amygdala emerges as a nodal point in a network that links together the cortical brain regions involved in emotional processing.Clinical evidence concerning the significance of this circuitry linked through the amygdala has come from functional imaging studies of patients suffering from depression, in which this set of interrelated forebrain structures displays abnormal patterns of cerebral blood flow, especially in the left hemisphere. More generally, the amygdala and its connections to the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia are likely to influence the selection and initiation of behaviors aimed at obtaining rewards and avoiding punishments. The parts of Studies of fear conditioning in rodents show that the amygdala plays a critical role in the association of an innocuous auditory tone with an aversive mechanical sensation. Does this finding imply that the human amygdala is similarly involved in the experience of fear and the expression of fearful behavior Recent reports of at least one extraordinary patient support the idea that the amygdala is indeed a key brain center for the experience of fear.The patient suffers from a rare, autosomal recessive condition called Urbach-Wiethe disease, a disorder that causes bilateral calcification and atrophy of the anterior-medial temporal lobes. As a result, both of S.M.s amygdalas are extensively damaged, with little or no detectable injury to the hippocampal formation or nearby temporal neocortex The investigators next asked S.M. to draw facial expressions of the same set of emotions from memory. Although the subjects obviously differed in artistic abilities and the detail of their renderings, S.M. produced skillful pictures of each emotion, except for fear the prefrontal cortex interconnected with the amygdala are also involved in organizing and planning future behaviors thus, the amygdala may provide emotional input to overt deliberations of this sort.Finally, it is likely that interactions between the amygdala, the neocortex and related subcortical circuits account for what is perhaps the most enigmatic aspect of emotional experience: the highly subjective "feelings" that attend most emotional states. Although the neurobiology of such experience is not understood, it is reasonable to assume that emotional feelings arise as a consequence of a more general cognitive capacity for self-awareness. In this conception, feelings entail both the immediate conscious experience of implicit emotional processing and explicit processing of semantically based thought. Thus, feelings are plausibly Emotions 703 face would look like." After several failed attempts, she produced the sketch of a cowering figure with hair standing on end, evidently because she knew these clichs about the expression of fear. In short, S.M. has a severely limited concept of fear and, consequently, fails to recognize the emotion of fear in facial expressions. Studies of other individuals with bilateral destruction of the amygdala are consistent with this account. As might be expected, S.M.s deficiency also limits her ability to experience fear in situations where this emotion is appropriate.Despite the adage "have no fear," to truly live without fear is to be deprived of a crucial neural mechanism that facilitates appropriate social behavior, helps make advantageous decisions in critical circumstances, and, ultimately, promotes survival. Although some degree of disordered emotion is present in virtually all psychiatric problems, in affective disorders the essence of the disease is an abnormal regulation of the feelings of sadness and happiness. The most severe of these afflictions are major depression and manic depression. Depression, the most common of the major psychiatric disorders, has a lifetime incidence of 10-25% in women and 5-12% in men. Indeed, about half the suicides in this country occur in individuals with clinical depression. Not many decades ago, depression and mania were considered disorders that arose from circumstances or a neurotic inability to cope. It is now universally accepted that these conditions are neurobiological disorders. Among the strongest lines of evidence for this consensus are studies of the inheritance of these diseases. For example, the concordance of affective disorders is high in monozygotic compared to dizygotic twins. It has also become possible to study the brain activity of patients suffering from affective disorders by noninvasive brain imaging Despite evidence for a genetic predisposition and an increasing understanding of the brain areas involved, the cause of these conditions remains unknown. The efficacy of a large number of drugs Areas of increased blood flow in the left amygdala, orbital, and medial prefrontal cortex and in a location in the left medial thalamus consistent with the mediodorsal nucleus from a sample of patients diagnosed with unipolar clinical depression. The "hot" colors indicate statistically significant increases in blood flow, compared to a sample of nondepressed subjects. Since functional asymmetries of complex cortical processes are commonplace, it should come as no surprise that the two hemispheres make different contributions to the governance of emotion. Emotionality is lateralized in the cerebral hemispheres in at least two ways. First, as discussed in Chapter 26, the right hemisphere is especially important for the expression and comprehension of the affective aspects of speech. Thus, patients with damage to the supra-Sylvian portions of the posterior frontal and anterior parietal lobes on the right side may lose the ability Emotions 705 that influence catecholaminergic and serotonergic neurotransmission strongly implies that the basis of the disease is ultimately neurochemical Most depressed patients who use drugs such as the SSRIs report that they lead fuller lives and are more energetic and organized. Based on such information, these drugs are sometimes used not only to combat depression but also to "treat" individuals who have no definable psychiatric disorder. This abuse raises important social questions, similar to those posed by Aldous Huxley in his 1932 novel, where the mythical drug "Soma" was routinely administered to the inhabitants of his fictitious Brave New World to keep them content and docile. Presumably there is a middle ground between excessive suffering and excessive tranquility.to express emotion by modulation of their speech patterns. Patients with aprosodia tend to speak in a monotone, no matter what the circumstances or meaning of what is said. For example, one such patient, a teacher, had trouble maintaining discipline in the classroom. Because her pupils couldnt tell when she was angry or upset, she had to resort to adding phrases such as "I am angry and I really mean it" to indicate the emotional significance of her remarks. The wife of another patient felt her husband no longer loved her because he could not imbue his speech with cheerfulness or affection. Although such patients cannot express emotion in speech, they nonetheless experience normal emotional feelings.A second way in which the hemispheric processing of emotionality is asymmetrical concerns mood. Both clinical and experimental studies indicate that the left hemisphere is more importantly involved with what can be thought of as positive emotions, whereas the right hemisphere is more involved with negative ones. For example, the incidence and severity of depression is significantly higher in patients with lesions of the left anterior hemisphere compared to any other location. In contrast, patients with lesions of the right anterior hemisphere are often described as unduly cheerful. These observations suggest that lesions in the left hemisphere result in a relative loss of positive feelings, facilitating depression, whereas lesions of the right hemisphere result in a loss of negative feelings, leading to inappropriate optimism.Hemispheric asymmetry related to emotion is also apparent in normal individuals. For instance, auditory experiments that introduce sound into one ear or the other indicate a right-hemisphere superiority in detecting the emotional nuances in speech. Moreover, when facial expressions are specifi- cally presented to either the right or the left visual hemifield, the depicted emotions are more readily and accurately identified from the information in the left hemifield. Finally, kinematic studies of facial expressions show that most individuals more quickly and fully express emotions with the left facial musculature than with the right The experience of emotion-even on a subconscious level-has a powerful influence on other complex brain functions, including the neural faculties responsible for making rational decisions and the interpersonal judgments that guide social behavior. Evidence for this statement has come principally from studies of patients with damage to parts of the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex, as well as patients with injury or disease involving the amygdala. Such patients often have impairments in emotional processing, especially of the emotions engendered by complex personal and social situations, and they have difficulty making advantageous decisions. Adding to this body of evidence are results from brain imaging studies in normal subjects in which investigators have mapped the brain structures that participate in the necessary emotional and social appraisals. Antonio Damasio and his colleagues at the University of Iowa have suggested that such decision-making entails the rapid evaluation of a set of possible outcomes with respect to the future consequences associated with each course of action. It seems plausible that the generation of conscious or subconscious mental images that represent the consequences of each contingency triggers emotional states that involve either actual alterations of somatic and visceral motor function, or the activation of neural representations of such activity. Whereas William James proposed that we are "afraid because we tremble," Damasio and his colleagues suggest a vicarious representation of motor action and sensory feedback in the neural circuits of the frontal and parietal lobes. It is these vicarious states, according to Damasio, that give mental representations of contingencies the emotional valence that helps an individual to identify favorable or unfavorable outcomes.Experimental studies of fear conditioning have implied just such a role for the amygdala in associating sensory stimuli with aversive consequences. For example, the patient described in Box D showed an impaired ability to recognize and experience fear, together with impairment in rational decisionmaking. Similar evidence of the emotional influences on decision-making have also come from studies of patients with lesions in the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex. These clinical observations suggest that the amygdala and prefrontal cortex, as well as their striatal and thalamic connections, are not only involved in processing emotions, but also participate in the complex neural processing responsible for rational thinking. These same neural networks are engaged by sensory stimuli that convey important cues pertinent to appraising social circumstances and conventions. Thus, when judging the trustworthiness of human faces-a task of considerable importance for successful interpersonal relations-neural activity in the amygdala is specifically increased, especially when the face in question is deemed untrustworthy The word "emotion" covers a wide range of states that have in common the association of visceral motor responses, somatic behavior, and powerful subjective feelings. The visceral motor responses are mediated by the visceral motor nervous system, which is itself regulated by inputs from many other parts of the brain. The organization of the somatic motor behavior associated with emotion is governed by circuits in the limbic system, which includes the hypothalamus, the amygdala, and several regions of the cerebral cortex. Although a good deal is known about the neuroanatomy and transmitter chemistry of the different parts of the limbic system, there is still a dearth of information about how this complex circuitry mediates specific emotional states. Similarly, neuropsychologists, neurologists and psychiatrists are only now coming to appreciate the important role of emotional processing in other complex brain functions, such as decision-making and social behavior. A variety of other evidence indicates that the two hemispheres are differently specialized for the governance of emotion, the right hemisphere being the more important in this regard. The prevalence and social significance of human emotions and their disorders ensure that the neurobiology of emotion will be an increasingly important theme in modern neuroscience. Functional MRI shows increased neural activation bilaterally in the amygdala when normal subjects appraise the trustworthiness of human faces activity is also increased in the right insular cortex. The degree of activation is greatest when subjects evaluate faces that are considered untrustworthy. The same effect was observed when subjects were instructed to evaluate the trustworthiness of the faces or whether the faces were those of high school or university studentsman" "Its on the Y chromosome." These expressions denote pleasure with phenotypic sexual differences-how females and males look and behave. Sex-related differences in the phenotypic expression of genotype are called sexual dimorphisms. While some of the behavioral distinctions involved may be rooted in cultural or social norms, sexual dimorphisms arise primarily because the brains of females and males are in some respects different. In the rat, several structures in female and male brains clearly differ in the number, size, and connectivity of their constituent neurons. In humans and other primates, structural differences are less obvious but nonetheless present. In both rats and humans, sexually dimorphic brain structures tend to cluster around the third ventricle in the anterior hypothalamus and are an integral part of the system that governs visceral motor behavior. Other sexual dimorphisms are apparent in cerebral cortical structures, implying differences in more complex regulatory and other behaviors. The development of these structural differences depends primarily on the early effect of gonadal steroid hormones on maturing brain circuits, an influence that apparently continues to some extent throughout life. The functional consequences of sexual dimorphisms in rodents are beginning to be well understood. Although the significance of such differences in humans is less clear, they provide a plausible neural basis for the wide variety of human sexual behavior.Many animal behaviors differ between the sexes and are therefore referred to as sexually dimorphic. However, dimorphic behaviors and their neural substrates often overlap. Mounting behaviors in male and female rodents, for example, depend on social context and life history, as well as on hormones and the brain structures that produce them. Some sexually dimorphic behaviors are simply part of the reproductive repertoire, whereas others are associated with cognitive functions. An example of dimorphic behavior related to reproduction is apparent in songbirds. In many species, the male produces complex song, but the female does not. Song production arises from the activity of specific brain nuclei as described in Chapter 23, these nuclei are much larger in males than in females. The size of song control nuclei increases in females treated with testosterone or estradiol during development, and these "masculinized" females sing.Sex, Sexuality, and the Brain Rodents also exhibit sexually dimorphic behaviors associated with reproduction. Examples include the priming of the genitalia for sexual intercourse, and a stereotypical position assumed while having sex.Just as courting and behaviors associated with the sex act can be dimorphic, other more complex reproductive behaviors such as building nests, caring for the young, foraging for food, nursing, and so on can take different forms in female and male. In humans, the different behaviors of males and females can be far subtler, including sexual identity, the choice of a sexual partner, and behaviors that are not related directly to sexual or reproductive function, such as spatial thinking and use of language.In humans, as in other animals, the full range of these behavioral differences is necessarily based on the details of the underlying neural circuitry. Accordingly, neurobiologists have long looked for differences between the brains of females and males that might explain sexually dimorphic behaviors. As described later in this chapter, they have found many examples. Differences in the nervous system, like the behavioral differences they give rise to, are also referred to as sexually dimorphic. Bear in mind, however, that whereas brain and behavioral differences in songbirds or rodents usually have two distinct forms, in human females and males these differences tend to vary along a continuum.Human sexual behaviors are-quite obviously-less stereotyped than those of rodents. Like memory, language, sleep, and other higher order brain functions, sexual behavior is by no means simple to sort out, or even to categorize.Roughly speaking, the concept of sex can be subdivided into three categories: chromosomal sex, phenotypic sex, and gender. Chromosomal sex refers specifically to an individuals sex chromosomes. Most humans have either two X chromosomes or one X and one Y chromosome, with XX being a chromosomal female and XY a chromosomal male. Phenotypic sex refers to an individuals sex as determined by their internal and external genitalia, the expression of secondary sex characteristics, and their behavior. In the prototypical case, during development the XX genotype leads to an individual with ovaries, oviducts, uterus, cervix, clitoris, labia, and vagina-i.e., a phenotypic female. The XY genotype leads to a person with testicles, epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, penis, and scrotum-a phenotypic male.Gender, as the term is most often used, refers to an individuals subjective perception of their sex and their sexual orientation, which is harder to define than chromosomal or phenotypic sex. It should also be apparent that some people consider gender to be a political and social construct. For present purposes, however, gender entails self-appraisal according to the traits most often associated with one sex or the other, which are influenced by societal expectations and cultural norms as well as by biology. Sexual orientation also entails self-appraisal in the context of culture. To understand the neurobiology of sex, it is helpful to think of chromosomal sex as largely immutable phenotypic sex as modifiable by developmental processes, hormone treatments, andor surgery and gender as a more complex social and cultural construct that an individual may or may not want to accept.Clearly, chromosomal sex, phenotypic sex, and gender will not always be aligned. Genetic variations in alignment can challenge the usual definitions of female and male, and for the affected individuals can lead to psychosocial conflicts, sexual dysfunction, and other problems. These variations include individuals who are chromosomally XO, XXY, and XYY, with each of these genotypes having a particular phenotype. Other genetic variations entail mutations in genes coding for hormone receptors or for the hormones themselves. For instance in some XX individuals, a metabolic disorder called congenital adrenal hyperplasia leads to overactive adrenals during maturation, resulting in abnormally high levels of circulating androgens and hence, an ambiguous sexual phenotype. In addition to having a large clitoris and fused labia at birth, women with CAH often exhibit behavioral traits more often associated with boys than girls as children, and as adults they may be more likely to form homosexual relationships than are members of control groups. By analogy with the studies in rodents, high levels of circulating androgens may stimulate sexually dimorphic brain circuitry to have a male rather than female organization, leading to more aggressive play and the eventual choice of a female sexual partner.An example of a mutation in a gene responsible for hormone receptors is androgen insensitivity syndrome, also called testicular feminization.In an XY individual with AIS, the testes form and secrete testosterone and Mllerian-inhibiting hormone, as in normal males. The deficiency of receptors for these androgens, however, leads to the development of female external genitalia in an individual who is chromosomally male. Thus, people with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome look like females and self-identify as female, even though they have a Y chromosome. Since they are generally not aware of their condition until puberty, such individuals see themselves as female and are experienced by the rest of society as female. As a result of the lack of androgen receptors, the gender identity of androgen-insensitive individuals matches their external sexual phenotype, but not their chromosomal sex. Androgen-insensitive individuals also present one of the strongest arguments that brain circuits in primates are masculinized primarily by the action of androgens.Another variation in the alignment of chromosomal sex, phenotype, and gender occurs in certain chromosomal males who are phenotypic females early in life, but whose sexual phenotype changes at puberty. As infants and children, the genitalia of these individuals resembles that of females more than of males because they lack an enzyme, 5-a-reductase, that promotes the early development of male genitalia. Such children have labia with an enlarged clitoris since their testes have not descended by birth, they are generally raised as females. At puberty, however, when the testicular secretion of androgen becomes high, the clitoris enlarges into a penis and the testes descend, changing these individuals into phenotypic males. In the Dominican Republic and Haiti, where this congenital syndrome has been thoroughly studied in a particular pedigree, the condition is referred to colloquially as "testes-at-twelve." Now that the condition is well recognized in areas where it is prevalent, the children in these pedigrees are raised with the understanding that their genitalia will change. But even if the situation goes unrecognized, such individuals generally change their gender identification at puberty, and most eventually assume a male role, for reasons that are further considered in Box B.The presence of either two X chromosomes or an X and a Y chromosome in the cells of an embryo sets in motion events that establish phenotypical sex, including the sexually dimorphic development of the brain. The relevant neural effects are determined by the production of hormones, which depends in turn on the presence of either female or male gonads.The early stages of human embryonic development follow a plan that produces common precursors for the gonads. By about the sixth week of gestation, the primordial gonads have formed from somatic mesenchyme tissue, near the developing kidneys. Cells in the gonads differentiate into supporting and hormone-producing cells the germline cells, which divide by meiosis rather than mitosis and eventually become ova or sperm have a different origin, and migrate to the gonads from the yolk sac. Attached to the primordial gonads are two sets of tubes-the Mllerian and Wolffian ducts-that are the progenitors of the internal genitalia. Developing simultaneously is an undifferentiated structure called the urogenital groove, the progenitor of the external genitalia.The primary genetic influence on the development of the typical male phenotype is the sex-determining region on the Y chromosome, the Sry gene. When this region of the chromosome is activated during development, it turns on the production of a protein called testicular determining factor. It is TDF that instructs the testes to begin developing. Once activated, the male primordial gonads begin to produce testosterone. The cells of the testes also secrete Mllerian-inhibiting hormone, which prevents the Mllerian ducts from developing and allows the Wolffian ducts to develop into the epididymis, vas deferens, and semi- The general term used to describe all these variations is intersexuality. Intersexuality is apparent in 1 to 2% of all live births. In addition to the more clearly defined categories of Klinefelters syndrome, Turners syndrome, AIS, 5-a-reductase deficiency, and CAH, the many subtle permutations and combinations of genes, hormones, and environment clearly present a large number of biological and behavioral possibilities.The development of sexual dimorphisms in the central nervous system is ultimately an outcome of chromosomal sex. Chromosomal combinations usually determine the phenotype of the gonads the gonads, in turn, are responsible for producing most of the circulating sex hormones. Differences in circulating hormones lead to a variety of differential effects on the individuals development, including their physical appearance, response to pharmacological treatments, susceptibility to certain diseases, and brain development.The establishment of phenotypic dimorphisms under the influence of different relative amounts of circulating hormones has been best studied in rodents. This work has shown that different levels of hormones at critical times organizes andor activates circuits generating female-or male-typical behavior. Males have an early surge of testosterone, which masculinizes the genitalia and nervous system, and ultimately behavior. Paradoxically, many of the effects of testosterone on the rodent brain are really due to estrogens Sex, Sexuality, and the Brain 715 nal vesicles. Under these influences, the tissue around the urogenital groove becomes the penis and scrotum.Androgens alone, however, are not sufficient for male differentiation. Ken Korachs group at the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences has demonstrated that estrogens are also needed for the hormonal differentiation of the testes. More specifically, XY mice lacking estrogen receptors develop testes, but there is disruption of spermatogenesis and ultimately degeneration of the seminiferous tubules, leading to sterility. Thus the presence of TDF and the consequent production of androgens early in life lead to the differentiation of the male body and brain, but estrogens are also essential for the full development of the male phenotype.In XX embryos, the absence of TDF, testosterone, and Mllerian-inhibiting hormone allows the indifferent gonad to differentiate into an ovary, the Wolffian ducts to degenerate, and the Mllerian ducts to develop into the oviducts, uterus, and cervix. The tissue around the urogenital groove becomes the clitoris, labia, and vagina. In short, the early absence of androgens leads to the differentiation of a female body and brain. However, development of the female phenotype also depends on estrogens the absence of both  and  estrogen receptors results in ovaries that resemble testes, with structures resembling seminiferous tubule and the expression of Mllerian-inhibiting hormone.in the developmental window two weeks prenatal to two weeks postnatal: rodent neurons contain an enzyme that converts testosterone to estradiol, a form of estrogen. Thus, the surge of testosterone in developing males is effectively a surge of estradiol. Although testosterone is popularly considered the "male" hormone and estrogen the "female" hormone, the active agent in the brains of both male and female rodents is estradiol.Once the conversion of testosterone to estradiol has occurred, estradiol can influence gene transcription by binding with intracellular receptors that regulate gene transcription In the early 1960s, identical XY twins were born to a Canadian couple. When the twins were 7 months old, the parents had them circumcised. The surgeon, performing the operation using an electrocautery knife, burned one of the twins penises so severely that the penis was, in essence, destroyed. The medical consensus conveyed to the parents by the local physicians was that the disfigured twin would be unable to have a normal heterosexual life, would be shunned by his peers, and would suffer in a variety of other ways. Given this dire prognosis, the parents consulted an eminent sex researcher, John Money at Johns Hopkins University, to help them decide what should be done.After meeting with the family, Money advocated that they surgically reassign the childs sex and raise the boy as a girl. The parents consented, and at age 17 months the childs testes were removed and his scrotum reshaped to resemble a vulva. The little boy, Bruce, became known as Brenda within the family and personal circle Moneys medical records and published papers used the pseudonyms "John" and "Joan."The parents did everything they could to raise Brenda as a normal female. Although Moneys published reports were optimistic, subsequent interviews with the family, including the child himself, indicated that the truth was far more complex, and indeed deeply problematic. In a detailed follow-up of the case, Milton Diamond of the University of Hawaii and Keith Sigmundson described the struggle that Brenda suffered from the earliest age. The child refused to wear dresses, urinated standing up, always felt that something was wrong, and refused to comply with the hormone treatments that were initiated at puberty. At the age of 14, Brenda demanded to know the truth, and her equally frustrated parents reluctantly gave an account of the early events that had resulted in the current situation.Ironically, Brenda was greatly relieved to understand why "she" had always been subject to such deeply conflicting feelings, which had sometimes made life so miserable that "she" contemplated suicide. Brenda immediately reverted to male dress and behavior and started going by the name of David. David, who is now nearly 40, eventually underwent surgery to be reconfigured as a phenotypic male. He married, adopted his wifes children, and has lived a relatively conventional life as a father and husband.This case underscores the fact that, in the words of Diamond and Sigmundson, "the evidence is overwhelming that normal humans are not psychosocially neutral at birth but are, in keeping with their mammalian heritage, predisposed and biased to interact with environmental, familial, and social forces in either a male or female mode." Cases like Davids raise serious moral and ethical questions about the assignment of gender when, for one reason or another, that option is open. Since there is no indication at birth how the brain has been shaped by early exposure to hormones, in many cases there is insufficient information to know with what sex the child, or the adult, will ultimately identify. In Davids case, a grievous mistake was made by failing to understand the overwhelming influence on the brain of circulating androgens during early sexual development. David, whose surname is Reimer, is the subject of the biography by J. Colapinto listed below, and has welcomed the opportunity to make his case known in the interest of preventing such mistakes in the future. mammals generally, fetuses are exposed to estrogens generated by the maternal ovary and placenta. Why doesnt this estrogen interfere with sexual differentiation in female offspring Apparently, the answer is that developing mammals have a circulating protein called a-fetoprotein that binds circulating estrogens. The female brain is kept from early exposure to large amounts of estrogens, since estrogens are bound by -fetoprotein the male brain, however, is exposed via early testosterone surge testosterone is not affected by -fetoprotein, and is aromatized to estradiol only once inside neurons.The conversion of testosterone to estrogen may not be as important in humans and other primates, where evidence suggests that sexual differentiation of the brain relies more on androgens and androgen receptors. It is also androgens that bear most of the responsibility for stimulating sex drive in females as well as males. For this reason, XY individuals with AIS can be "super-feminine" in their behavior and rarely choose females as sexual partners.Finally, the influence of hormones in humans and other animals may be reinforced by sex differences established by genetic effects that are unrelated to hormonal differences during development. For example, Ingrid Reisert, working at the Universitat Albert-Einstein in Germany established that there are sex differences in the development of dopaminergic fibers in cell cultures prepared from the diencephalon prior to sexual differentiation. More recently, Geert DeVries and his colleagues at the University of Massachusetts created unusual male and female transgenic mice. In these animals, testes development occurred independently of the X or Y chromosome, thus demonstrating that XY mice with ovaries are, at least in some respects, more masculinized than XX mice with testes. Complex as this configuration of chromosomal sex and phenotype may be, the experiment shows that at least one sexually dimorphic trait depends on the presence of the Y chromosome, but not on the presence of testes and the androgens they secrete postnatally. This observation supports the notion that hormone-independent sex differences are a part of the developmental plan. This idea has also been examined in birds. Arthur Arnold and his group at the University of California at Los Angeles have shown that the well-known song patterns existing in male but not in female zebra finches are driven in part by genetic mechanisms that operate independently of hormone levels.These several studies raise the possibility that mechanisms in addition to hormones contribute to the sexual diversity of humans-a point that is important to bear in mind during the following discussion of the hormonedriven sex differences in rodents. Cholesterol is first converted to progesterone, the common precursor, by four enzymatic reactions. Progesterone can then be converted into testosterone via another series of enzymatic reactions testosterone in turn is converted to 5-adihydrotestosterone via 5-a-reductase, or to 17-b-estradiol via an aromatase. 17-bestradiol mediates most of the known hormonal effects in the brains of both female and male rodents.Gonadal steroids-whether estrogens or androgens-stimulate sexually dimorphic patterns of development by binding to estrogen or androgen receptors. These receptors, which are transcription factors activated by hormone binding, influence gene transcription and, ultimately, the development of an array of targets, including sexually dimorphic neural circuits. During development, and to some extent throughout life, estradiol stimulates brain dimorphisms by increasing size, nuclear volume, dendritic length, dendritic branching, dendritic spine density, and synaptic connectivity of the sensitive neurons. One of the first demonstrations of such effects was provided by Dominique Toran-Allerand at Columbia University, whoSex hormones, which include progestins, androgens, and estrogens, are all steroids derived from a common precursor, cholesterol Some neurons express receptors for more than one steroid and, as a result, hormones can have a synergistic effect. For example, all neurons with progesterone receptors also express estrogen Distribution of estradiol-sensitive neurons illustrated in a sagittal section of the rat brain. Animals were given radioactively labeled estradiol dots represent regions where the label accumulated. In the rat, most estradiol-sensitive neurons are located in the preoptic area, hypothalamus, and amygdala. Other hormonally generated differences in brain circuits leading to differences in reproductive behaviors in both female and male rodents have been documented by administering testosterone to females, or by Sex, Sexuality, and the Brain 719 receptors. Although female reproductive behaviors can be elicited by estrogen alone, the behavior is greatly facilitated in females given estrogen followed by progesterone.Steroids can have a direct effect on neural activity by altering the permeability of the membrane to neurotransmitters and their precursors, or by altering the function of neurotransmitter receptors Sex steroids can also have an indirect effect on neural activity by forming noncovalent bonds with steroid receptors, or by affecting other signaling pathways. Binding to a steroid receptor causes a conformational change that allows the receptor to bind to specific DNA-recognition elements called hormone-responsive elements. Steroid receptor co-activators, which are members of a family of co-activators that modulate the activity of steroid receptors, can enhance the effects of steroids by opening up chromatin structure and In short, the development of sexually dimorphic structures in the rodent brain is primarily under the control of circulating sex hormones, with some determined at least in part by genes on the Y chromosome. Again, the effect of hormones is less certain and may be more complex in the primate brain. For example, Kim Wallen at Emory University investigated the role of social conditions in establishing some of the sex-typical behaviors of rhesus monkeys that were once thought to be solely determined by hormones. He found that although rough-and-tumble play and mounting were exhibited less frequently by females than by males, the environment in which the animals were reared affected the degree of this sex difference. Moreover, when reared with only their own sex, males displayed more and females less of these behaviors. Thus, while the propensity for such sex-typical juvenile behaviors may be established by hormonal actions, their expression is shaped by the environment in which the animal develops. It is not difficult to extrapolate from these studies to humans, where it seems especially important to consider both nature and nurture in the development of differences between sexes.Other sexual dimorphisms in the central nervous system influence behaviors ranging from the control of motor responses in reproductive behaviors to aspects of cognition. This section briefly reviews additional examples specifically related to reproductive behavior the following section considers sexual dimorphisms related to cognitive abilities. Perhaps the best example of sexual dimorphism related to motor control of a reproductive behavior is the difference in size of a nucleus in the lumbar segment of the rat spinal cord called the spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus. The motor neurons of this nucleus innervate two striated muscles of the perineum, the bulbocavernosus and levator ani As with most sexual dimorphisms, the analogous situation in humans is considerably less clear than in experimental animals. In humans, the spinal cord structure that corresponds to the spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus in rats is called Onufs nucleus. Onufs nucleus consists of two cell groups in the sacral cord, the dorsal medial and the ventral lateral groups. The dorsal medial group is not sexually dimorphic however, human females have fewer neurons in the ventral lateral group than males What might account for these somewhat discrepant findings First, human studies are always complicated by the difficulty of obtaining human brains that meet the criteria of uniformity applied to the brains of experimental animals. Second, it takes a long time to acquire a large enough number of human brains to confidently interpret the results. Swaab and colleagues suggested that INAH-1 and 2 change in size over time thus the age of the subjects studied might also influence observed sex differences. For instance, INAH-1 is evidently about the same size in females and males up until 2-4 years of age it then becomes larger in males until approximately 50 years of age, when it decreases in size in both sexes. Although generally larger in males, INAH-2 is larger in females of childbearing age than in prepubescent and postmenopausal females. Changes in nuclear size with age in humans presumably arise as a result of changing levels of circulating sex steroids.Despite the difficulties inherent in the interpretation of such studies, one aspect of human reproduction in which these hypothalamic nuclei have been implicated is the choice of a sexual partner. In addition to heterosexual behavior, some humans express sexual behaviors toward both females and males, and some only toward members of their own phenotypic sex. Still other people are interested the opposite sex  Other researchers have suggested that dimorphisms of additional hypothalamic nuclei are related to sexual orientation and gender identity. Dick Swaab and Michel Hofman at the Netherlands Institute for Brain Research studied the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus, which lies just above the optic chiasm in both rodents and humans and generates circadian The suprachiasmatic nucleus may also differ between homosexual and heterosexual males. The suprachiasmatic nucleus of homosexual males appears to be larger and to contain more neurons than that of heterosexual males with or without AIDS. The history of these several research efforts highlights the difficulty of carrying out controlled studies that measure small differences in the human brain and the importance of reliable replication. Taken together, however, the sum of this evidence suggests a plausible explanation of the continuum of human sexuality: small differences in the relevant brain structures generate significant differences in sexual identity and behavior. By analogy with rodents, it seems likely these human brain dimorphisms are established by the early influence of hormones acting on the brain nuclei that mediate various aspects of sexuality. For instance, low levels of circulating androgens in a male early in life could lead to a relatively feminine brain in chromosomal males, whereas high levels of circulating androgens in females could lead to a relatively masculinized brain in chromosomal females.As attractive as this hypothesis may be, the development of sexuality in humans is almost certainly a good deal more complicated. Although LeVays findings support the idea that homosexuality is related to "feminization" of the male brain, Swaab and Hofmans data on the size of the suprachiasmatic nucleus undermine the interpretation that the male homosexuals brain is simply "feminized" by a lack of androgens early in development. Whereas they found a difference in the volume of this suprachiasmatic nucleus between homosexual and heterosexual males, in contrast to LeVay they found no difference in the volume of this nucleus between females and heterosexual males. In addition, the development of the INAH-1 dimorphism occurs between 2 and 4 years of age-long after the first testosterone surge in males. These discrepancies suggest that the development of sexually dimorphic nuclei in humans does not depend solely on early hormone levels.As discussed earlier, genetic effects of the Y chromosome independent of those influencing the production of hormones can affect sexually dimorphic traits. It should also be remembered that adult neural circuits also have some plasticity, leaving open the possibility that behavior, experience, and changes in circulating hormone levels combine to generate dimorphisms at later life stages. In apparent confirmation of this suggestion, Breedlove and colleagues have reported that the posterodorsal nucleus of the medial amygdala has a greater volume in male rats than in female, but that castration of adult males and androgen treatment of adult females reverses this effect. Thus, the question of whether we are simply "born that way" with respect to sexuality remains difficult to answer. Like most developmental events, a combination of intrinsic and extrinsic factors are involved.Despite all these uncertainties, work over the last decade has clearly placed human sexuality on a much firmer biological footing. This is a welcome advance over the not-too-distant past when unusual sexual behavior was commonly explained in social, Freudian, or moralistic terms.Evidence for sexually dimorphic behavior in humans that is not directly related to reproductive functions comes mainly from clinical observations. For example, neurologists have reported that females suffer aphasia less often than males after damage to the left hemisphere. This observation led to the suggestion that language functions are to some degree differently represented in females and males. To explore this issue, Doreen Kimura at the University of Western Ontario looked at the language ability in right-handed patients with unilateral lesions of the left cerebral cortex. She found that females were more likely to suffer aphasia if the damage was to the anterior left hemisphere, whereas males were more likely to suffer aphasia if the damage was located posteriorly. Kimuras data suggest that language areas of the female brain are more anteriorly represented and thus less vulnerable to stroke.Susan Rossell and her colleagues at University College London have suggested other such sexual dimorphisms in the human brain. Using fMRI to measure activation during a lexical visual field task, Rossell and colleagues found more brain activity in response to such challenges in females than in males. Females show greater activation of the right hemisphere areas, especially in the inferior frontal, inferior posterior, and middle temporal gyri. In addition, females have a left visual field advantage when the task is presented visually, showing faster reaction times than males. In males, activation is more lateralized to the left hemisphere, especially the inferior posterior temporal lobe and the fusiform and lingual gyri. These studies and the earlier work by Kimura suggest that females and males use overlapping but somewhat different cortical areas to carry out language tasks.The performance of tasks that depend more on one hemisphere than the other has also been examined in females and males. One simple test for visuospatial differences entails how well girls and boys are able to identify shapes after feeling them with the right or left hand while blindfolded. Both sexes perform equally well with either hand up to about 6 years of age. Thereafter, boys start scoring better when they use their left hand, whereas girls continue to score equally well with either hand up to 13 years of age, when they also begin to do better with their left hand. This study suggests that boys develop the right hemispheric lateralization of visuospatial skills earlier than girls.The idea that females and males develop lateralized functions at different rates is supported by studies of the development of the prefrontal cortex of non-human primates. Removing the prefrontal cortex before 15 to 18 months of age does not affect motor-planning functions in female rhesus monkeys, although the same lesion in male monkeys at this age diminishes these skills.In a similar vein, Matthias Riepe and his colleagues at the University of Ulm have reported that human females and males use different strategies to navigate in an unfamiliar environment. Males trying to find their way out of a three-dimensional virtual reality maze use the geometry of the whole scene and "escape" from the maze in a little more than 2 minutes on average. Females tend to use local landmarks or clues and take about a minute longer to get out. Functional brain imaging shows that both sexes use the right hippocampus during this task, but that men use the left hippocampus as well. Conversely, women tend to use the right prefrontal cortex, whereas men do not. Involvement of the inferior parietal lobe is also different in females and males. The two sides of this structure are thought to mediate different aspects of visual processing, with the left side more involved in perceptions such as judging how fast something is moving or mentally rotating three-dimensional objects, and the right side mediating working memory of spatial relationships. Finally, Godfrey Pearlson and his colleagues at Johns Hopkins University have determined that the right parietal lobe is larger than the left in females, whereas in males the left parietal lobe is larger than the right.None of these studies is in itself compelling, but taken together they support the idea that the two sexes to some degree use different cognitive strategies, and that these differences affect some aspects of behavior.As mentioned earlier, there is growing evidence that some brain circuits continue to change over the course of an individuals life, depending on both experience and hormonal milieu. For example, changes in the brain circuits of adult rats occur in conjunction with parenting behavior. Michael Merzenich, Judith Stern and their colleagues at the University of California at San Francisco have shown that the cortical representation of the ventrum is altered in the somatic sensory cortex of the lactating female. As determined by electrophysiological mapping, the representation of the ventrum is approximately twice as large in nursing females as in non-lactating controls. Moreover, the receptive fields of the neurons representing the skin of the ventrum in lactating females are decreased to about a third of that of non-lactating females Another example of adult plasticity under hormonal control is the altered connections between cells of the female rat hypothalamus after giving birth. In females prior to pregnancy, the relevant hypothalamic neurons are isolated from each other by thin astrocytic processes. Under the influence of the hormonal environment prevailing during birth and lactation, the glial processes retract and the oxytocin-and vasopressin-secreting neurons become electrically coupled by gap junctions These examples of adult plasticity suggest that some of the sexual circuits of the brain are malleable not only during development, but to some degree throughout life under the effects of experience and the changing hormonal milieu.  