stretch, this reflex circuit is normally responsible for the steady level of tension in muscles called muscle tone. Changes in muscle tone occur in a variety of pathological conditions, and it is these changes that are assessed by examination of tendon reflexes.In terms of engineering principles, the stretch reflex arc is a negative feedback loop used to maintain muscle length at a desired value The smaller  motor neurons control the functional characteristics of the muscle spindles by modulating their level of excitability. As was described earlier, when the muscle is stretched, the spindle is also stretched and the rate of discharge in the afferent fibers increased. When the muscle shortens, however, the spindle is relieved of tension, or "unloaded," and the sensory axons that innervate the spindle might therefore be expected to fall silent during contraction. However, they remain active. The  motor neurons terminate on the contractile poles of the intrafusal fibers, and the activation of these neurons causes intrafusal fiber contraction-in this way maintaining the tension on the middle of the intrafusal fibers where the sensory axons terminate. Thus, co-activation of the  and  motor neurons allows spindles to function at all muscle lengths during movements and postural adjustments.The level of  motor neuron activity often is referred to as  bias, or gain, and can be adjusted by upper motor neuron pathways as well as by local reflex circuitry. The larger the gain of the stretch reflex, the greater the change in muscle force that results from a given amount of stretch applied to the intrafusal fibers. If the gain of the reflex is high, then a small amount of stretch applied to the intrafusal fibers will produce a large increase in the number of  motor neurons recruited and a large increase in their firing rates this in turn leads to a large increase in the amount of tension produced by the extrafusal fibers. If the gain is low, a greater stretch is required to generate the same amount of tension in the extrafusal muscle fibers. In fact, the gain of the stretch reflex is continuously adjusted to meet different functional requirements. For example, while standing in a moving bus, the gain of the stretch reflex can be modulated by upper motor neuron pathways to com-pensate for the variable changes that occur as the bus stops and starts or progresses relatively smoothly. During voluntary movements,  and  motor neurons are often co-activated by higher centers to prevent muscle spindles from being unloaded In addition, the level of  motor neuron activity can be modulated independently of  activity if the context of a movement requires it. In general, the baseline activity level of  motor neurons is high if a movement is relatively difficult and demands rapid and precise execution. For example, recordings from cat hindlimb muscles show that  activity is high when the animal has to perform a difficult movement such as walking across a narrow beam. Unpredictable conditions, as when the animal is picked up or handled, also lead to marked increases in  activity and greatly increased spindle responsiveness.Gamma motor neuron activity, however, is not the only factor that sets the gain of the stretch reflex. The gain also depends on the level of excitability of the  motor neurons that serve as the efferent side of this reflex loop. Thus, in addition to the influence of descending upper motor neuron projections, other local circuits in the spinal cord can change the gain of the stretch reflex by excitation or inhibition of either  or  motor neurons.Another sensory receptor that is important in the reflex regulation of motor unit activity is the Golgi tendon organ. Golgi tendon organs are encapsu- All animals must coordinate body movements so they can navigate successfully in their environment. All vertebrates, including mammals, use local circuits in the spinal cord to control the coordinated movements associated with locomotion. The cellular basis of organized locomotor activity, however, has been most thoroughly studied in an invertebrate, the leech, and a simple vertebrate, the lamprey.Both the leech and the lamprey lack peripheral appendages for locomotion possessed by many vertebrates. Furthermore, their bodies comprise repeating muscle segments. Thus, in order to move through the water, both animals must coordinate the movement of each segment. They do this by orchestrating a sinusoidal displacement of each body segment in sequence, so that the animal is propelled forward through the water.The leech is particularly well-suited for studying the circuit basis of coordinated movement. The nervous system in the leech consists of a series of interconnected segmental ganglia, each with motor neurons that innervate the corresponding segmental muscles A central pattern generator circuit coordinates this undulating motion. In the leech, the relevant neural circuit is an ensemble of sensory neurons, interneurons, and motor neurons repeated in each segmental ganglion that controls the local sequence of contraction and relaxation in each segment of the body wall musculature The lamprey, one of the simplest vertebrates, is distinguished by its clearly segmented musculature and by its lack of bilateral fins or other appendages. In order to move through the water, the lamprey contracts and relaxes each muscle segment in sequence Unlike the leech with its segmental ganglia, the lamprey has a continuous spinal cord that innervates its muscle segments. The lamprey spinal cord is simpler than that of other vertebrates, and several classes of identified neurons occupy stereotyped positions. This orderly arrangement again facilitates the identification and analysis of neurons that constitute the central pattern generator circuit.In the lamprey spinal cord, the intrinsic firing pattern of a set of interconnected sensory neurons, interneurons and motor neurons establishes the pattern of undulating muscle contractions that underlie swimming These observations on pattern generating circuits for locomotion in relatively simple animals have stimulated parallel studies of terrestrial mammals in which central pattern generators in the spinal cord also coordinate locomotion. Although different in detail, terrestrial locomotion ultimately relies on the sequential movements similar to those that propel the leech and the lamprey through aquatic environments, and intrinsic physiological properties of spinal cord neurons that establish rythmicity for coordinated movement. tic than the fibrils of the tendon. When a muscle actively contracts, however, the force acts directly on the tendon, leading to an increase in the tension of the collagen fibrils in the tendon organ and compression of the intertwined sensory receptors. As a result, Golgi tendon organs are exquisitely sensitive to increases in muscle tension that arise from muscle contraction but, unlike spindles, are relatively insensitive to passive stretch The Ib axons from Golgi tendon organs contact inhibitory local circuit neurons in the spinal cord that synapse, in turn, with the  motor neurons that innervate the same muscle. The Golgi tendon circuit is thus a negative feedback system that regulates muscle tension it decreases the activation of a muscle when exceptionally large forces are generated and this way protects the muscle. This reflex circuit also operates at reduced levels of muscle force, counteracting small changes in muscle tension by increasing or decreasing the inhibition of  motor neurons. Under these conditions, the Golgi tendon system tends to maintain a steady level of force, counteracting effects that diminish muscle force. In short, the muscle spindle system is a feedback system that monitors and maintains muscle length, and the Golgi tendon system is a feedback system that monitors and maintains muscle force.Like the muscle spindle system, the Golgi tendon organ system is not a closed loop. The Ib inhibitory interneurons also receive synaptic inputs from a variety of other sources, including cutaneous receptors, joint receptors, muscle spindles, and descending upper motor neuron pathways Motor neuron Flexor muscle Extensor muscleSo far, the discussion has focused on reflexes driven by sensory receptors located within muscles or tendons. Other reflex circuitry mediates the withdrawal of a limb from a painful stimulus, such as a pinprick or the heat of a flame. Contrary to what might be imagined given the speed with which we are able to withdraw from a painful stimulus, this flexion reflex involves several synaptic links The contribution of local circuitry to motor control is not, of course, limited to reflexive responses to sensory inputs. Studies of rhythmic movements such as locomotion and swimming in animal models have demonstrated that local circuits in the spinal cord called central pattern generators are fully capable of controlling the timing and coordination of such complex patterns of movement, and of adjusting them in response to altered circumstances.A good example is locomotion In quadrupeds, changes in locomotor speed are also accompanied by changes in the sequence of limb movements. At low speeds, for example, there is a back-to-front progression of leg movements, first on one side and then on the other. As the speed increases to a trot, the movements of the right forelimb and left hindlimb are synchronized. At the highest speeds, the movements of the two front legs are synchronized, as are the movements of the two hindlimbs Given the precise timing of the movement of individual limbs and the coordination among limbs that are required in this process, it is natural to  Another key fact that has emerged from this work is that the same neurons can participate in different programmed motor activities, as circumstances Record assume that locomotion is accomplished by higher centers that organize the spatial and temporal activity patterns of the individual limbs. However, following transection of the spinal cord at the thoracic level, a cats hindlimbs will still make coordinated locomotor movements if the animal is supported and placed on a moving treadmill The complex of signs and symptoms that arise from damage to the lower motor neurons of the brainstem and spinal cord is referred to as the "lower motor neuron syndrome." In clinical neurology, this constellation of problems must be distinguished from the "upper motor neuron syndrome" that results from damage to the descending upper motor neuron pathways.demand. For example, the subset of neurons producing gastric mill activity overlaps the subset that generates pyloric activity. This economic use of neuronal subsets has not yet been described in the central pattern generators of mammals, but seems likely to be a feature of all such circuits.Damage to lower motor neuron cell bodies or their peripheral axons results in paralysis or paresis of the affected muscles, depending on the extent of the damage. In addition to paralysis andor paresis, the lower motor neuron syndrome includes a loss of reflexes due to interruption of the efferent limb of the sensory motor reflex arcs. Damage to lower motor neurons also entails a loss of muscle tone, since tone is in part dependent on the monosynaptic reflex arc that links the muscle spindles to the lower motor neurons. A somewhat later effect is atrophy of the affected muscles due to denervation and disuse. The muscles involved may also exhibit fibrillations and fasciculations, which are spontaneous twitches characteristic of single denervated muscle fibers or motor units, respectively. These phenomena arise from changes in the excitability of denervated muscle fibers in the case of fibrillation, and from abnormal activity of injured  motor neurons in the case of fasciculations. These spontaneous contractions can be readily recognized in an electromyogram, providing an especially helpful clinical tool in diagnosing lower motor neuron disorders. Four distinct but highly interactive motor subsystems-local circuits in the spinal cord and brainstem, descending upper motor neuron pathways that control these circuits, the basal ganglia, and the cerebellum-all make essential contributions to motor control. Alpha motor neurons located in the spinal cord and in the cranial nerve nuclei in the brainstem directly link the nervous system and muscles, with each motor neuron and its associated muscle fibers constituting a functional entity called the motor unit. Motor units vary in size, amount of tension produced, speed of contraction, and degree of fatigability. Graded increases in muscle tension are mediated by both the orderly recruitment of different types of motor units and an increase in motor neuron firing frequency. Local circuitry involving sensory inputs, local circuit neurons, and  and  motor neurons are especially important in the reflexive control of muscle activity. The stretch reflex is a monosynaptic circuit with connections between sensory fibers arising from muscle spindles and the  motor neurons that innervate the same or syner- How these mutant genes lead to the phenotype of motor neuron disease is uncertain. Defects of axonal transport have long been hypothesized to cause ALS. Evidence for this cause is that transgenic mice with mutant SOD1 exhibit defects in slow axonal transport early in the course of the disease, and that dynactin binds to microtubules and thus that mutant dynactin may modify axonal transport along microtubules. However, whether defective axonal transport is the cellular mechanism by which these mutant proteins lead to motor neuron disease remains to be clearly established. Despite these uncertainties, demonstration that mutations of each of these three genes can cause familial ALS has given scientists valuable clues about the molecular pathogenesis of at least some forms of this tragic disorder. gistic muscles. Gamma motor neurons regulate the gain of the stretch reflex by adjusting the level of tension in the intrafusal muscle fibers of the muscle spindle. This mechanism sets the baseline level of activity in  motor neurons and helps to regulate muscle length and tone. Other reflex circuits provide feedback control of muscle tension and mediate essential functions such as the rapid withdrawal of limbs from painful stimuli. Much of the spatial coordination and timing of muscle activation required for complex rhythmic movements such as locomotion are provided by specialized local circuits called central pattern generators. Because of their essential role in all of these circuits, damage to lower motor neurons leads to paralysis of the associated muscle and to other changes, including the loss of reflex activity, the loss of muscle tone, and eventually muscle atrophy. The axons of upper motor neurons descend from higher centers to influence the local circuits in the brainstem and spinal cord that organize movements by coordinating the activity of lower motor neurons. The sources of these upper motor neuron pathways include several brainstem centers and a number of cortical areas in the frontal lobe. The motor control centers in the brainstem are especially important in ongoing postural control. Each center has a distinct influence. Two of these centers, the vestibular nuclear complex and the reticular formation, have widespread effects on body position. Another brainstem center, the red nucleus, controls movements of the arms also in the brainstem, the superior colliculus contains upper motor neurons that initiate orienting movements of the head and eyes. The motor and "premotor" areas of the frontal lobe, in contrast, are responsible for the planning and precise control of complex sequences of voluntary movements. Most upper motor neurons, regardless of their source, influence the generation of movements by directly affecting the activity of the local circuits in the brainstem and spinal cord. Upper motor neurons in the cortex also control movement indirectly, via pathways that project to the brainstem motor control centers, which, in turn, project to the local organizing circuits in the brainstem and cord. A major function of these indirect pathways is to maintain the bodys posture during cortically initiated voluntary movements.Some insight into the functions of the different sources of the upper motor neurons is provided by the way the lower motor neurons and local circuit neurons-the ultimate targets of the upper motor neurons-are arranged within the spinal cord. As described in Chapter 15, lower motor neurons in the ventral horn of the spinal cord are organized in a somatotopic fashion: The most medial part of the ventral horn contains lower motor neuron pools that innervate axial muscles or proximal muscles of the limbs, whereas the more lateral parts contain lower motor neurons that innervate the distal muscles of the limbs. The local circuit neurons, which lie primarily in the intermediate zone of the spinal cord and supply much of the direct input to the lower motor neurons, are also topographically arranged. Thus, the medial region of the intermediate zone of the spinal cord gray matter contains the local circuit neurons that synapse with lower motor neurons in the medial part of the ventral horn, whereas the lateral regions of the intermediate zone contain local neurons that synapse primarily with lower motor neurons in the lateral ventral horn.The patterns of connections made by local circuit neurons in the medial region of the intermediate zone are different from the patterns made by those in the lateral region, and these differences are related to their respective functions Differences in the way upper motor neuron pathways from the cortex and brainstem terminate in the spinal cord conform to these functional distinctions between the local circuits that organize the activity of axial and distal muscle groups. Thus, most upper motor neurons that project to the medial part of the ventral horn also project to the medial region of the intermediate zone the axons of these upper motor neurons have collateral branches that terminate over many spinal cord segments, reaching medial cell groups on both sides of the spinal cord. The sources of these projections are primarily the vestibular nuclei and the reticular formation as their terminal zones in the medial spinal cord gray matter suggest, they are concerned primarily with postural mechanisms Two additional brainstem structures, the superior colliculus and the red nucleus, also contribute upper motor neuron pathways to the spinal cord. The axons arising from the superior colliculus project to medial cell groups in the cervical cord, where they influence the lower motor neuron circuits that control axial musculature of the neck As described in Chapter 13, the vestibular nuclei are the major destination of the axons that form the vestibular division of the eighth cranial nerve as such, they receive sensory information from the semicircular canals and the otolith organs that specifies the position and angular acceleration of the head. Many of the cells in the vestibular nuclei that receive this information are upper motor neurons with descending axons that terminate in the medial region of the spinal cord gray matter, although some extend more laterally to contact the neurons that control the proximal muscles of the limbs. The projections from the vestibular nuclei that control axial muscles and those that influence proximal limb muscles originate from different cells and take different routes. Other upper motor neurons in the vestibular nuclei project to lower motor neurons in the cranial nerve nuclei that control eye movements. This pathway produces the eye movements that maintain fixation while the head is moving.The reticular formation is a complicated network of circuits located in the core of the brainstem that extends from the rostral midbrain to the caudal medulla and is similar in structure and function to the intermediate gray matter in the spinal cord Both the vestibular nuclei and the reticular formation provide information to the spinal cord that maintains posture in response to environmental disturbances of body position and stability. As expected, the vestibular nuclei make adjustments in posture and equilibrium in response to infor-Figure 16.3 Direct and indirect pathways from the motor cortex to the spinal cord. Neurons in the motor cortex that supply the lateral part of the ventral horn to initiate movements of the distal limbs also terminate on neurons in the reticular formation to mediate postural adjustments that support the movement. The reticulospinal pathway terminates in the medial parts of the ventral horn, where lower motor neurons that innervate axial muscles are located. Thus, the motor cortex has both direct and indirect routes by which it can influence the activity of spinal cord neurons.If one were to exclude from the structure of the brainstem the cranial nerve nuclei, the nuclei that provide input to the cerebellum, the long ascending and descending tracts that convey explicit sensory and motor signals, and the structures that lie dorsal and lateral to the ventricular system, what would be left is a central core region known as the tegmentum, so named because it "covers" the ventral part of the brainstem. Scattered among the diffuse fibers that course through the tegmentum are small clusters of neurons that are collectively known as the reticular formation. With few exceptions, these clusters of neurons are difficult to recognize as distinct nuclei in standard histological preparations. Indeed, the modifying term reticular was applied to this loose collection of neuronal clusters because the early neurohistologists envisioned these neurons as part of a sparse network of diffusely connected cells that extends from the intermediate gray regions of the cervical spinal cord to the lateral regions of the hypothalamus and certain nuclei along the midline of the thalamus.These early anatomical concepts were influenced by lesion experiments in animals and clinical observations in human patients made in the 1930s and 40s. These studies showed that damage to the upper brainstem tegmentum produced coma, suggesting the existence of a neural system in the midbrain and rostral pons that supported normal conscious brain states and transitions between sleep and wakefulness. These ideas were articulated most influentially by G. Moruzzi and H. Magoun when they proposed a "reticular activating system" to account for these functions and the critical role of the brainstem reticular formation. Current evidence generally supports the notion of an activating function of the rostral reticular formation however, neuroscientists now recognize the complex interplay of a variety of neurochemical systems comprising distinct cell clusters in the rostral tegmentum, and a myriad of other functions performed by neuronal clusters in more caudal parts of the reticular formation. Thus, with the advent of more precise means of demonstrating anatomical connections, as well as more sophisticated means of identifying neurotransmitters and the activity patterns of individual neurons, the concept of a "sparse network" engaged in a common function is now obsolete.Nevertheless, the term reticular formation remains, as does the daunting challenge of understanding the anatomical complexity and functional heterogeneity of this complex brain region. Fortunately, two simplfying generalizations can be made. First, the functions of the different clusters of neurons in the reticular formation can be grouped into two broad categories: modulatory functions and premotor functions. Second, the modulatory functions are primarily found in the rostral sector of the reticular formation, whereas the premotor functions are localized in more caudal regions.Several clusters of large neurons in the midbrain and rostral pontine reticular formation participate-together with certain diencephalic nuclei-in the modulation of conscious states. These effects are accomplished by long-range, diencephalic projections of cholinergic neurons near the superior cerebellar peduncle, as well as the more widespread forebrain projections of noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus and serotenergic neurons in the raphe nuclei. Generally speaking, these biogenic amine neurotransmitters function as neuromodulators that alter the membrane potential and thus the firing patterns of thalamocortical and cortical neurons. Also included in this category are the dopaminergic systems of the ventral midbrain that modulate cortico-striatal interactions in the basal ganglia and the responsiveness of neurons in the prefrontal cortex and limbic forebrain. However, not all modulatory projections from the rostral reticular formation are directed toward the forebrain. Although not always considered part of the reticular formation, it is helpful to include in this functional group certain neuronal columns in the periaqueductal gray that project to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and modulate the transmission of nociceptive signals.Reticular formation neurons in the caudal pons and medulla oblongata generally serve a premotor function in the sense that they intergate feedback sensory signals with executive commands from upper motor neurons and deep cerebellar nuclei and, in turn, organize the efferent activities of lower visceral motor and certain somatic motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord. Examples of this functional category include the smaller neurons that coordinate a broad range of motor activities, including the gaze centers discussed in Chapter 19 and local circuit neurons near the somatic motor and branchiomotor nuclei that organize mastication, facial expressions, and a variety of reflexive orofacial behaviors such as sneezing, hiccuping, yawning, and swallowing. In addition, there are "autonomic centers" that organize the efferent activities of specific pools of primary visceral motor neurons. Included in this subgroup are distinct clusters of neurons in the ventral-lateral medulla that generate respiratory rhythms, and others that regulate the cardioinhibitory mation from the inner ear. Direct projections from the vestibular nuclei to the spinal cord ensure a rapid compensatory response to any postural instability detected by the inner ear. In contrast, the motor centers in the reticular formation are controlled largely by other motor centers in the cortex or brainstem. The relevant neurons in the reticular formation initiate adjustments that stabilize posture during ongoing movements.The way the upper motor neurons of the reticular formation maintain posture can be appreciated by analyzing their activity during voluntary movements. Even the simplest movements are accompanied by the activation of muscles that at first glance seem to have little to do with the primary purpose of the movement. For example, output of neurons in the nucleus ambiguus and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve. Still other clusters organize more complex activities that require the coordination of both somatic motor and visceral motor outflow, such as gagging and vomiting, and even laughing and crying.One set of neuronal clusters that does not fit easily into this rostral-caudal framework is the set of neurons that give rise to the reticulospinal projections. As described in the text, these neurons are distributed in both rostral and caudal sectors of the reticular formation and they give rise to long-range projections that innervate lower motor neuronal pools in the medial ventral horn of the spinal cord. The reticulospinal inputs serve to modulate the gain of segmental reflexes involving the muscles of the trunk and proximal limbs and to initiate certain stereotypical patterns of limb movement.In summary, the reticular formation is best viewed as a heterogeneous collection of distinct neuronal clusters in the brainstem tegmentum that either modulate the excitability of distant neurons in the forebrain and spinal cord or coordinate the firing patterns of more local lower motor neuronal pools engaged in reflexive or stereotypical somatic motor and visceral motor behavior.  ms after the tone. However, as the records show, the contraction of the biceps is accompanied by a significant increase in the activity of a proximal leg muscle, the gastrocnemius. In fact, contraction of the gastrocnemius muscle begins well before contraction of the biceps. These observations show that postural control entails an anticipatory, or feedforward, mechanism The importance of the reticular formation for feedforward mechanisms of postural control has been explored in more detail in cats trained to use a forepaw to strike an object. As expected, the forepaw movement is accompanied by feedforward postural adjustments in the other legs to maintain the animal upright. These adjustments shift the animals weight from an even distribution over all four feet to a diagonal pattern, in which the weight is carried mostly by the contralateral, nonreaching forelimb and the ipsilateral hindlimb. Lifting of the forepaw and postural adjustments in the other limbs can also be induced in an alert cat by electrical stimulation of the motor cortex. After pharmacological inactivation of the reticular formation, however, electrical stimulation of the motor cortex evokes only the forepaw movement, without the feedforward postural adjustments that normally accompany them.The results of this experiment can be understood in terms of the fact that the upper motor neurons in the motor cortex influence the spinal cord circuits by two routes: direct projections to the spinal cord and indirect projections to brainstem centers that in turn project to the spinal cord Further evidence for the contrasting functions of the direct and indirect pathways from the motor cortex and brainstem to the spinal cord comes from experiments carried out by the Dutch neurobiologist Hans Kuypers, who examined the behavior of rhesus monkeys that had the direct pathway to the spinal cord transected at the level of the medulla, leaving the indirect descending upper motor neuron pathways to the spinal cord via the brainstem centers intact. Immediately after the surgery, the animals were able to use axial and proximal muscles to stand, walk, run, and climb, but they had great difficulty using the distal parts of their limbs independently of other body movements. For example, the monkeys could cling to the cage but were unable to reach toward and pick up food with their fingers rather, they used the entire arm to sweep the food toward them. After several weeks, the animals recovered some independent use of their hands and were again able to pick up objects of interest, but this action still involved the concerted closure of all of the fingers. The ability to make independent, fractionated movements of the fingers, as in opposing the movements of the fingers and thumb to pick up an object, never returned. These observations show that following damage to the direct corticospinal pathway at the level of the medulla, the indirect projections from the motor cortex via the brainstem centers are capable of sustaining motor behavior that involves primarily the use of proximal muscles. In contrast, the direct projections from the motor cortex to the spinal cord provide the speed and agility of movements, enabling a higher degree of precision in fractionated finger movements than is possible using the indirect pathways alone.  Selective damage to the corticospinal tract in humans is rarely seen in the clinic. Nonetheless, this evidence in nonhuman primates showing that direct projections from the cortex to the spinal cord are essential for the performance of discrete finger movements helps explain the limited recovery in humans after damage to the motor cortex or to the internal capsule. Immediately after such an injury, such patients are typically paralyzed. With time, however, some ability to perform voluntary movements reappears. These movements, which are presumably mediated by the brainstem centers, are crude for the most part, and the ability to perform discrete finger movements such as those required for writing, typing, or buttoning typically remains impaired.The upper motor neurons in the cerebral cortex reside in several adjacent and highly interconnected areas in the frontal lobe, which together mediate the planning and initiation of complex temporal sequences of voluntary movements. These cortical areas all receive regulatory input from the basal ganglia and cerebellum via relays in the ventrolateral thalamus, as well as inputs from the somatic sensory regions of the parietal lobe. Although the phrase "motor cortex" is sometimes used to refer to these frontal areas collectively, more commonly it is restricted to the primary motor cortex, which is located in the precentral gyrus The pyramidal cells of cortical layer V are the upper motor neurons of the primary motor cortex. Their axons descend to the brainstem and spinal motor centers in the corticobulbar and corticospinal tracts, passing through the internal capsule of the forebrain to enter the cerebral peduncle at the base of the midbrain The lateral corticospinal tract forms the direct pathway from the cortex to the spinal cord and terminates primarily in the lateral portions of the ventral horn and intermediate gray matter Clinical observations and experimental work dating back a hundred years or more have provided a reasonably coherent picture of the functional organization of the motor cortex. By the end of the nineteenth century, experimental work in animals by the German physiologists G. Theodor Fritsch and Eduard Hitzig had shown that electrical stimulation of the motor cortex elicits contractions of muscles on the contralateral side of the body. At about the same time, the British neurologist John Hughlings Jackson surmised that the motor cortex contains a complete representation, or map, of the bodys musculature.sory motor area in the anterior cingulate gyrus, a cortical region that is associated with emotional processing. Therefore, a better interpretation is that strokes involving the middle cerebral artery spare the superior aspect of the face because the relevant upper motor neurons are in the cingulum, which is supplied by the anterior cerebral artery.An additional puzzle has also been resolved by these studies. Strokes involving the anterior cerebral artery or subcortical lesions that interrupt the corticobulbar projection seldom produce significant paresis of the superior facial muscles. Superior facial sparing in these situations may arise because this cingulate motor area sends descending projections through the corticobulbar pathway that bifuracte and innervate dorsal facial motor cell columns on both sides of the brainstem. Thus, the superior muscles of facial expression are controlled by symmetrical inputs from the cingulate motor areas in both hemispheres. Jackson reached this conclusion from his observation that the abnormal movements during some types of epileptic seizures "march" systematically from one part of the body to another. For instance, partial motor seizures may start with abnormal movements of a finger, progress to involve the entire hand, then the forearm, the arm, the shoulder, and, finally, the face.This early evidence for motor maps in the cortex was confirmed shortly after the turn of the nineteenth century when Charles Sherrington published his classical maps of the organization of the motor cortex in great apes, using focal electrical stimulation. During the 1930s, one of Sherringtons students, the American neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield, extended this work by demonstrating that the human motor cortex also contains a spatial map of the bodys musculature. By correlating the location of muscle contractions with the site of electrical stimulation on the surface of the motor cortex, Penfield mapped the representation of the muscles in the precentral gyrus in over 400 neurosurgical patients The introduction in the 1960s of intracortical microstimulation allowed a more detailed understanding of motor maps. Microstimulation entails the delivery of electrical currents an order of magnitude smaller than those used by Sherrington and Penfield. By passing the current through the sharpened tip of a metal microelectrode inserted into the cortex, the upper motor neurons in layer V that project to lower motor neuron circuitry can be stimulated focally. Although intracortical stimulation generally confirmed Penfields spatial map in the motor cortex, it also showed that the finer organization of the map is rather different than most neuroscientists imagined. For example, when microstimulation was combined with recordings of muscle electrical activity, even the smallest currents capable of eliciting a response initiated the excitation of several muscles, suggesting that organized movements rather than individual muscles are represented in the map. Furthermore, within major subdivisions of the map, a particular movement could be elicited by stimulation of widely separated sites, indicating that neurons in nearby regions are linked by local circuits to organize specific movements. This interpretation has been supported by the observation that the regions responsible for initiating different movements overlap substantially.About the same time that these studies were being undertaken, Ed Evarts and his colleagues at the National Institutes of Health were pioneering a technique in which implanted microelectrodes were used to record the electrical activity of individual motor neurons in awake, behaving monkeys. In these experiments, the monkeys were trained to perform a variety of motor tasks, thus providing a means of correlating neuronal activity with voluntary movements. Evarts and his group found that the force generated by contracting muscles changed as a function of the firing rate of upper motor neurons. Moreover, the firing rates of the active neurons often changed prior to movements involving very small forces. Evarts therefore proposed that the primary motor cortex contributes to the initial phase of recruitment of lower motor neurons involved in the generation of finely controlled movements. Additional experiments showed that the activity of primary motor neurons is correlated not only with the magnitude, but also with the direction of the force produced by muscles. Thus, some neurons show progressively less activity as the direction of movement deviates from the neurons "preferred direction."A further advance was made in the mid-1970s by the introduction of spike-triggered averaging Finally, the relative amount of activity across large populations of neurons appears to encode the direction of visually-guided movements. Thus, the direction of movements in monkeys could be predicted by calculating a "neuronal population vector" derived simultaneously from the discharges of upper motor neurons that are "broadly tuned" in the sense that they discharge prior to movements in many directions A complex mosaic of interconnected frontal lobe areas that lie rostral to the primary motor cortex also contributes to motor functions Electrical stimulation studies carried out by the neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield and his colleagues in human patients clearly demonstrated a systematic map of the bodys musculature in the primary motor cortex. The fine structure of this map, however, has been a continuing source of controversy. Is the map in the motor cortex a "piano keyboard" for the control of individual muscles, or is it a map of movements, in which specific sites control multiple muscle groups that contribute to the generation of particular actions Initial experiments implied that the map in the motor cortex is a fine-scale representation of individual muscles. Thus, stimulation of small regions of the map activated single muscles, suggesting that vertical columns of cells in the motor cortex were responsible for controlling the actions of particular muscles, much as columns in the somatic sensory map are thought to analyze particular types of stimulus information.More recent studies using anatomical and physiological techniques, however, have shown that the map in the motor cortex is far more complex than a columnar representation of particular muscles. Individual pyramidal tract axons are now known to terminate on sets of spinal motor neurons that innervate different muscles. This relationship is evident even for neurons in the hand representation of the motor cortex, the region that controls the most discrete, fractionated movements. Furthermore, cortical microstimulation experiments have shown that contraction of a single muscle can be evoked by stimulation over a wide region of the motor cortex in a complex, mosaic fashion. It seems likely that horizontal connections within the motor cortex and local circuits in the spinal cord create ensembles of neurons that coordinate the pattern of firing in the population of ventral horn cells that ultimately generate a given movement.Thus, while the somatotopic maps in the motor cortex generated by early studies are correct in their overall topography, the fine structure of the map is far more intricate. Unraveling these details of motor maps still holds the key to understanding how patterns of activity in the motor cortex generate a given movement. . This technique can be used to determine all the muscles that are influenced by a given motor neuron. Are special sensory motor talents, such as the exceptional speed and coordination displayed by talented athletes, ballet dancers, or concert musicians visible in the structure of the nervous system The widespread use of noninvasive brain imaging techniques has generated a spate of studies that have tried to answer this and related questions. Most of these studies have sought to link particular sensory motor skills to the amount of brain space devoted to such talents. For example, a study of professional violinists, cellists, and classical guitarists purported to show that representations of the "fingering" digits of the left hand in the right primary somatic sensory cortex are larger than the corresponding representations in nonmusicians.Although such studies in humans remain controversial, the idea that greater motor talents will be reflected in a greater amount of brain space devoted to that task makes good sense. In particular, comparisons across species show that special talents are invariably based on commensurately sophisticated brain circuitry, which means more neurons, more synaptic contacts between neurons, and more supporting glial cells-all of which occupy more space within the brain. The size and proportion of bodily representations in the primary somatic sensory and motor cortices of various animals reflects species-specific nuances of mechanosensory discrimination and motor control. Thus, the representations of the paws are disproportionately large in the sensorimotor cortex of raccoons rats and mice devote a great deal of cortical space to representations of their prominent facial whiskers and a large fraction of the sensorimotor cortex of the star-nosed mole is given over to representing the elaborate nasal appendages that provide critical mechanosensory information for this burrowing species. The link between behavioral competence and the allocation of space is equally apparent in animals in which a particular ability has diminished, or has never developed fully, during the course of evolution.Nevertheless, it remains uncertain how-or if-this principle applies to variations in behavior among members of the same species, including humans. For example, there does not appear to be any average hemisphere asymmetry in the allocation of space in either the primary sensory or motor area, as measured cytoarchitectonically. Some asymmetry might be expected simply because 90% of humans prefer to use the right hand when they perform challenging manual tasks. It seems likely that individual sensory motor talents among humans will be reflected in the allocation of an appreciably different amount of space to those behaviors, but this issue is just beginning to be explored with quantitative methods that are adequate to the challenge.neurons in the lateral premotor cortex have responses that are linked in time to the occurrence of movements as in the primary motor area, many of these cells fire most strongly in association with movements made in a specific direction. However, these neurons are especially important in conditional motor tasks. That is, in contrast to the neurons in the primary motor area, when a monkey is trained to reach in different directions in response to a Plot showing that the neurons discharge rate was greatest before movements in a particular direction, which defines the neurons "preferred direction." The black lines indicate the discharge rate of individual upper motor neurons prior to each direction of movement. By combining the responses of all the neurons, a "population vector" can be derived that represents the movement direction encoded by the simultaneous activity of the entire population. The medial premotor cortex, like the lateral area, mediates the selection of movements. However, this region appears to be specialized for initiating movements specified by internal rather than external cues. In contrast to lesions in the lateral premotor area, removal of the medial premotor area in a monkey reduces the number of self-initiated or "spontaneous" movements the animal makes, whereas the ability to execute movements in response to external cues remains largely intact. Imaging studies suggest that this cortical region in humans functions in much the same way. For example, PET scans show that the medial region of the premotor cortex is activated when the subjects perform motor sequences from memory. In accord with this evidence, single unit recordings in monkeys indicate that many neurons in the medial premotor cortex begin to discharge one or two seconds before the onset of a self-initiated movement.In summary, both the lateral and medial areas of the premotor cortex are intimately involved in selecting a specific movement or sequence of movements from the repertoire of possible movements. The functions of the areas differ, however, in the relative contributions of external and internal cues to the selection process.Injury of upper motor neurons is common because of the large amount of cortex occupied by the motor areas, and because their pathways extend all the way from the cerebral cortex to the lower end of the spinal cord. Damage to the descending motor pathways anywhere along this trajectory gives rise to a set of symptoms called the upper motor neuron syndrome.This clinical picture differs markedly from the lower motor neuron syndrome described in Chapter 15 and entails a characteristic set of motor deficits After several days, however, the spinal cord circuits regain much of their function for reasons that are not fully understood. Thereafter, a consistent pattern of motor signs and symptoms emerges, including:1. The Babinski sign. The normal response in an adult to stroking the sole of the foot is flexion of the big toe, and often the other toes. Following damage to descending upper motor neuron pathways, however, this stimulus elicits extension of the big toe and a fanning of the other toes Muscle tone is the resting level of tension in a muscle. In general, maintaining an appropriate level of muscle tone allows a muscle to make an optimal response to voluntary or reflexive commands in a given context. Tone in the extensor muscles of the legs, for example, helps maintain posture while standing. By keeping the muscles in a state of readiness to resist stretch, tone in the leg muscles prevents the amount of sway that normally occurs while standing from becoming too large. During activities such as walking or running, the "background" level of tension in leg muscles also helps to store mechanical energy, in effect enhancing the muscle tissues springlike qualities. Muscle tone depends on the resting level of discharge of  motor neurons. Activity in the Ia spindle afferents-the neurons responsible for the stretch reflex-is the major contributor to this tonic level of firing. As described in Chapter 15, the  efferent system regulates the resting level of activity in the Ia afferents and establishes the baseline level of  motor neuron activity in the absence of muscle stretch.Clinically, muscle tone is assessed by judging the resistance of a patients limb to passive stretch. Damage to either the  motor neurons or the Ia afferents carrying sensory information to the  motor neurons results in a decrease in muscle tone, called hypotonia. In general, damage to descending pathways that terminate in the spinal cord has the opposite effect, leading to an increase in muscle tone, or hypertonia. The neural changes responsible for hypertonia following damage to higher centers are not well understood however, at least part of this change is due to an increase in the responsiveness of  motor neurons to Ia sensory inputs. Thus, in experimental animals in which descending inputs have been severed, the resulting hypertonia can be eliminated by sectioning the dorsal roots.Increased resistance to passive movement following damage to higher centers is called spasticity, and is associated with two other characteristic signs: the claspknife phenomenon and clonus. When first stretched, a spastic muscle provides a high level of resistance to the stretch and then suddenly yields, much like the blade of a pocket knife. Hyperactivity of the stretch reflex loop is the reason for the increased resistance to stretch in the clasp-knife phenomenon. The physiological basis for the inhibition that causes the sudden collapse of the stretch reflex is thought to involve the activation of the Golgi tendon organs.Clonus refers to a rhythmic pattern of contractions due to the alternate stretching and unloading of the muscle spindles in a spastic muscle. Clonus can be demonstrated in the flexor muscles of the leg by pushing up on the sole of patients foot to dorsiflex the ankle. If there is damage to descending upper motor neuron pathways, holding the ankle loosely in this position generates rhythmic contractions of both the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles. Both the increase in muscle tone and the pathological oscillations seen after damage to descending pathways are very different from the tremor at rest and cogwheel rigidity present in basal ganglia disorders such as Parkinsons disease, phenomena discussed in Chapters 17 and 18.3. A loss of the ability to perform fine movements. If the lesion involves the descending pathways that control the lower motor neurons to the upper limbs, the ability to execute fine movements is lost.Although these upper motor neuron signs and symptoms may arise from damage anywhere along the descending pathways, the spasticity that follows damage to descending pathways in the spinal cord is less marked than the spasticity that follows damage to the cortex or internal capsule. For example, the extensor muscles in the legs of a patient with spinal cord damage cannot support the individuals body weight, whereas those of a patient with damage at the cortical level often can. On the other hand, lesions that interrupt the descending pathways in the brainstem above the level of the vestibular nuclei but below the level of the red nucleus cause even greater extensor tone than that which occurs after damage to higher regions. Sherrington, who first described this phenomenon, called the increased tone decerebrate rigidity. In the cat, the extensor tone in all four limbs is so great after lesions that spare the vestibulospinal tracts that the animal can stand without support. Patients with severe brainstem injury at the level of the pons may exhibit similar signs of decerebration, i.e., arms and legs stiffly extended, jaw clenched, and neck retracted. The relatively greater hypertonia following damage to the nervous system above the level of the spinal cord is presumably explained by the remaining activity of the intact descending pathways from the vestibular nuclei and reticular formation, which have a net excitatory influence on these stretch reflexes.Two sets of upper motor neuron pathways make distinct contributions to the control of the local circuitry in the brainstem and spinal cord. One set originates from neurons in brainstem centers-primarily the reticular formation and the vestibular nuclei-and is responsible for postural regulation. The reticular formation is especially important in feedforward control of posture. In contrast, the neurons in the vestibular nuclei that project to the spinal cord are especially important in feedback postural mechanisms. The other major upper motor neuron pathway originates from the frontal lobe and includes projections from the primary motor cortex and the nearby premotor areas. The premotor cortices are responsible for planning and selecting movements, whereas the primary motor cortex is responsible for their execution. The motor cortex influences movements directly by contacting lower motor neurons and local circuit neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem, and indirectly by innervating neurons in brainstem centers that in turn project to lower motor neurons and circuits. Although the brainstem pathways can independently organize gross motor control, direct projections from the motor cortex to local circuit neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord are essential for the fine, fractionated movements of the distal parts of the limbs, the tongue, and face that are especially important in our daily lives.As described in the preceding chapter, motor regions of the cortex and brainstem contain upper motor neurons that initiate movement by controlling the activity of local circuit and lower motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord. This chapter and the next discuss two additional regions of the brain that are important in motor control: the basal ganglia and the cerebellum. In contrast to the components of the motor system that harbor upper motor neurons, the basal ganglia and cerebellum do not project directly to either the local circuit or lower motor neurons instead, they influence movement by regulating the activity of upper motor neurons. The term basal ganglia refers to a large and functionally diverse set of nuclei that lie deep within the cerebral hemispheres. The subset of these nuclei relevant to this account of motor function includes the caudate, putamen, and the globus pallidus. Two additional structures, the substantia nigra in the base of the midbrain and the subthalamic nucleus in the ventral thalamus, are closely associated with the motor functions of these basal ganglia nuclei and are included in the discussion. The motor components of the basal ganglia, together with the substantia nigra and the subthalamic nucleus, effectively make a subcortical loop that links most areas of the cortex with upper motor neurons in the primary motor and premotor cortex and in the brainstem. The neurons in this loop respond in anticipation of and during movements, and their effects on upper motor neurons are required for the normal course of voluntary movements. When one of these components of the basal ganglia or associated structures is compromised, the patient cannot switch smoothly between commands that initiate a movement and those that terminate the movement. The disordered movements that result can be understood as a consequence of abnormal upper motor neuron activity in the absence of the supervisory control normally provided by the basal ganglia.The motor nuclei of the basal ganglia are divided into several functionally distinct groups Nearly all regions of the neocortex project directly to the corpus striatum, making the cerebral cortex the source of the largest input to the basal ganglia by far. Indeed, the only cortical areas that do not project to the corpus striatum are the primary visual and primary auditory cortices The cortical inputs to the caudate and putamen are not equivalent, however, and the differences in input reflect functional differences between these two nuclei. The caudate nucleus receives cortical projections primarily from multimodal association cortices, and from motor areas in the frontal lobe that control eye movements. As the name implies, the association cortices do not process any one type of sensory information rather, they receive inputs from a number of primary and secondary sensory cortices and associated thalamic nuclei. The putamen, on the other hand, receives input from the primary and secondary somatic sensory cortices in the parietal lobe, the secondary visual cortices in the occipital and temporal lobes, the premotor and motor cortices in the frontal lobe, and the auditory association areas in the temporal lobe. The fact that different cortical areas project to different regions of the striatum implies that the corticostriatal pathway consists of multiple parallel pathways serving different functions. This interpretation is supported by the observation that the segregation is maintained in the structures that receive projections from the striatum, and in the pathways that project from the basal ganglia to other brain regions.There are other indications that the corpus striatum is functionally subdivided according to its inputs. For example, visual and somatic sensory cortical projections are topographically mapped within different regions of the putamen. Moreover, the cortical areas that are functionally interconnected at the level of the cortex give rise to projections that overlap extensively in the striatum. Anatomical studies by Ann Graybiel and her colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have shown that regions of different cortical areas concerned with the hand converge in specific rostrocaudal bands within the striatum conversely, regions in the same corti- cal areas concerned with the leg converge in other striatal bands. These rostrocaudal bands therefore appear to be functional units concerned with the movement of particular body parts. Another study by the same group showed that the more extensively cortical areas are interconnected by corticocortical pathways, the greater the overlap in their projections to the striatum.A further indication of functional subdivision within the striatum is the spatial distribution of different types of medium spiny neurons. Although medium spiny neurons are distributed throughout the striatum, they occur in clusters of cells called "patches" or "striosomes," in a surrounding "matrix" of neurochemically distinct cells. Whereas the distinction between the patches and matrix was originally based only on differences in the types of neuropeptides contained by the medium spiny cells in the two regions, the cell types are now known to differ as well in the sources of their inputs from the cortex and in the destinations of their projections to other parts of the basal ganglia. For example, even though most cortical areas project to medium spiny neurons in both these compartments, limbic areas of the cortex project more heavily to the patches, whereas motor and somatic sensory areas project preferentially to the neurons in the matrix. These differences in the connectivity of medium spiny neurons in the patches and matrix further support the conclusion that functionally distinct pathways project in parallel from the cortex to the striatum.  The nature of the signals transmitted to the caudate and putamen from the cortex is not understood. It is known, however, that collateral axons of corticocortical, corticothalamic, and corticospinal pathways all form excitatory glutamatergic synapses on the dendritic spines of medium spiny neurons The medium spiny cells also receive noncortical inputs from interneurons, from the midline and intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus, and from brainstem aminergic nuclei. In contrast to the cortical inputs to the dendritic spines, the local circuit neuron and thalamic synapses are made on the dendritic shafts and close to the cell soma, where they can modulate the effectiveness of cortical synaptic activation arriving from the more distal dendrites. The aminergic inputs are dopaminergic and they originate in a subdivision of the substantia nigra called pars compacta because of its densely packed cells. The dopaminergic synapses are located on the base of the spine, in close proximity to the cortical synapses, where they more directly modulate cortical input When the medium spiny neurons do become active, their firing is associated with the occurrence of a movement. Extracellular recordings show that these neurons typically increase their rate of discharge just before an impending movement. Neurons in the putamen tend to discharge in anticipation of body movements, whereas caudate neurons fire prior to eye movements. These anticipatory discharges are evidently part of a movement selection process in fact, they can precede the initiation of movement by as much as several seconds. Similar recordings have also shown that the discharges of some striatal neurons vary according to the location in space of the target of a movement, rather than with the starting position of the limb relative to the target. Thus, the activity of these cells may encode the decision to move toward the target, rather than simply the direction and amplitude of the actual movement necessary to reach the target. The medium spiny neurons of the caudate and putamen give rise to inhibitory GABAergic projections that terminate in another pair of nuclei in the basal ganglia complex: the internal division of the globus pallidus and a specific region of the substantia nigra called pars reticulata. These nuclei are in turn the major sources of the output from the basal ganglia The efferent neurons of the internal globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata together give rise to the major pathways that link the basal ganglia with upper motor neurons located in the cortex and in the brainstem Because the efferent cells of both the globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata are GABAergic, the main output of the basal ganglia is inhibitory. In contrast to the quiescent medium spiny neurons, the neurons in both these output zones have high levels of spontaneous activity that tend to prevent unwanted movements by tonically inhibiting cells in the superior colliculus and thalamus. Since the medium spiny neurons of the striatum also are GABAergic and inhibitory, the net effect of the excitatory inputs that reach the striatum from the cortex is to inhibit the tonically active inhibitory cells of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata The permissive role of the basal ganglia in the initiation of movement is perhaps most clearly demonstrated by studies of eye movements carried out by Okihide Hikosaka and Robert Wurtz at the National Institutes of Health The projections from the medium spiny neurons of the caudate and putamen to the internal segment of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars  reticulata are part of a "direct pathway" and, as just described, serve to release the upper motor neurons from tonic inhibition. This pathway is summarized in In 1872, a physician named George Huntington described a group of patients seen by his father and grandfather in their practice in East Hampton, Long Island. The disease he defined, which became known as Huntingtons disease, is characterized by the gradual onset of defects in behavior, cognition, and movement beginning in the fourth and fifth decades of life. The disorder is inexorably progressive, resulting in death within 10 to 20 years. HD is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, a feature that has led to a much better understanding of its cause in molecular terms.One of the more common inherited neurodegenerative diseases, HD usually presents as an alteration in mood or a change in personality that often takes the form of increased irritability, suspiciousness, and impulsive or eccentric behavior. Defects of memory and attention may also occur. The hallmark of the disease, however, is a movement disorder consisting of rapid, jerky motions with no clear purpose these choreiform movements may be confined to a finger or may involve a whole extremity, the facial musculature, or even the vocal apparatus. The movements themselves are involuntary, but the patient often incorporates them into apparently deliberate actions, presumably in an effort to obscure the problem. There is no weakness, ataxia, or deficit of sensory function. Occasionally, the disease begins in childhood or adolescence. The clinical manifestations in juveniles include rigidity, seizures, more marked dementia, and a rapidly progressive course.A distinctive neuropathology is associated with these clinical manifestations: a profound but selective atrophy of the caudate and putamen, with some associated degeneration of the frontal and temporal cortices The availability of extensive HD pedigrees has allowed geneticists to decipher the molecular cause of this disease. HD was one of the first human diseases in which DNA polymorphisms were used to localize the mutant gene, which in 1983 was mapped to the short arm of chromosome 4. This discovery led to an intensive effort to identify the HD gene within this region by positional cloning. Ten years later, these efforts culminated in identification of the gene responsible for the disease. In contrast to previously recognized forms of mutations such as point mutations, deletions, or insertions, the mutation of Huntingtin is an unstable triplet repeat. In normal individuals, Huntingtin contains between 15 and 34 repeats, whereas the gene in HD patients contains from 42 to over 66 repeats.HD is one of a growing number of diseases attributed to unstable DNA segments. Other examples are fragile X syndrome, myotonic dystrophy, spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, and spinocerebellar ataxia type 1. In the latter two and HD, the repeats consist of a DNA segment that codes for the amino acid glutamine and is present within the coding region of the gene.The mechanism by which the increased number of polyglutamine repeats injures neurons is not clear. The leading hypothesis is that the increased numbers of glutamines alter protein folding, which somehow triggers a cascade of molecular events culminating in dysfunction and neuronal death. Interestingly, although Huntingtin is expressed predominantly in the expected neurons in the basal ganglia, it is also present in regions of the brain that are not affected in HD. Indeed, the gene is expressed in many organs outside the nervous system. How and why the mutant Huntingtin uniquely injures striatal neurons is unclear. Continuing to elucidate this molecular pathogenesis will no doubt provide further insight into this and other triplet repeat diseases. In the direct pathway, transiently inhibitory projections from the caudate and putamen project to tonically active inhibitory neurons in the internal segment of the globus pallidus, which project in turn to the VAVL complex of the thalamus. Transiently excitatory inputs to the caudate and putamen from the cortex and substantia nigra are also shown, as is the transiently excitatory input from the thalamus back to the cortex. In the indirect pathway, transiently active inhibitory neurons from the caudate and putamen project to tonically active inhibitory neurons of the external segment of the globus pallidus. Note that the influence of nigral dopaminergic input to neurons in the indirect pathway is inhibitory. The globus pallidus neurons project to the subthalamic nucleus, which also receives a strong excitatory input from the cortex. The subthalamic nucleus in turn projects to the globus pallidus, where its transiently excitatory drive acts to oppose the disinhibitory action of the direct pathway. In this way, the indirect pathway modulates the effects of the direct pathway.nal globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata. In the indirect pathway, a population of medium spiny neurons projects to the lateral or external segment of the globus pallidus. This external division sends projections both to the internal segment of the globus pallidus and to the subthalamic nucleus of the ventral thalamus The indirect pathway through the basal ganglia apparently serves to modulate the disinhibitory actions of the direct pathway. The subthalamic nucleus neurons that project to the internal globus pallidus and substantia The substantia nigra is largely absent in the region above the cerebral peduncles. Right: The mesencephalon from a normal subject, showing intact substantia nigra. The consequences of imbalances in this fine control mechanism are apparent in diseases that affect the subthalamic nucleus. These disorders remove a source of excitatory input to the internal globus pallidus and reticulata, and thus abnormally reduce the inhibitory outflow of the basal ganglia. A basal ganglia syndrome called hemiballismus, which is characterized by violent, involuntary movements of the limbs, is the result of damage to the subthalamic nucleus. The involuntary movements are initiated by abnormal discharges of upper motor neurons that are receiving less tonic inhibition from the basal ganglia.Another circuit within the basal ganglia system entails the dopaminergic cells in the pars compacta subdivision of substantia nigra and modulates the output of the corpus striatum. The medium spiny neurons of the corpus striatum project directly to substantia nigra pars compacta, which in turn sends widespread dopaminergic projections back to the spiny neurons. These dopaminergic influences on the spiny neurons are complex: The same nigral neurons can provide excitatory inputs mediated by D1 type dopaminergic receptors on the spiny cells that project to the internal globus pallidus, and inhibitory inputs mediated by D2 type receptors on the spiny cells that project to the external globus pallidus. Since the actions of the direct and indirect pathways on the output of the basal ganglia are antagonistic, these different influences of the nigrostriatal axons produce the same effect, namely a decrease in the inhibitory outflow of the basal ganglia.The modulatory influences of this second internal circuit help explain many of the manifestations of basal ganglia disorders. For example, Parkinsons disease is caused by the loss of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons In fact, many of the symptoms seen in Parkinsons disease reflect a failure of the disinhibition normally mediated by the basal ganglia. Thus, Parkinsonian patients tend to have diminished facial expressions and lack "associated movements" such as arm swinging during walking. Indeed, any movement is difficult to initiate and, once initiated, is often difficult to terminate. Disruption of the same Parkinsons disease is the second most common degenerative disease of the nervous system. Described by James Parkinson in 1817, this disorder is characterized by tremor at rest, slowness of movement, rigidity of the extremities and neck, and minimal facial expressions. Walking entails short steps, stooped posture, and a paucity of associated movements such as arm swinging. To make matters worse, in some patients these abnormalities of motor function are associated with dementia. Following a gradual onset between the ages of 50 and 70, the disease progresses slowly and culminates in death 10 to 20 years later.The defects in motor function are due to the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta, a population that projects to and innervates neurons in the caudate and putamen. Although the cause of the progressive deterioration of these dopaminergic neurons is not known, genetic investigations are providing clues to the etiology and pathogenesis. Whereas the majority of cases of Parkinsons disease are sporadic, there may be specific forms of susceptibility genes that confer increased risk of acquiring the disease, just as the apoE4 allele increases the risk of Alzheimers disease. Familial forms of the disease caused by single gene mutations account for less than 10% of all cases, However, identification of these rare genes is likely give some insight into molecular pathways that may underlie the disease. Mutations of three distinct genes-a-synuclein, Parkin, and DJ-1-have been implicated in rare forms of this disease. Identification of these genes provides an opportunity to generate mutant mice carrying the mutant form of the human gene, potentially providing a useful animal model in which the pathogenesis can be elucidated and therapies can be tested.In contrast to other neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimers disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, in Parkinsons disease the spatial distribution of the degenerating neurons is largely restricted to the substantia nigra pars compacta. This spatial restriction, combined with the defined and relatively homogeneous phenotype of the degenerating neurons, has provided an opportunity for novel therapeutic approaches to this disorder.One strategy is so-called gene therapy. Gene therapy refers to the correction of a disease phenotype through the introduction of new genetic information into the affected organism. Although still in its infancy, this approach promises to revolutionize treatment of human disease. One therapy for Parkinsons disease would be to enhance release of dopamine in the caudate and putamen. In principle, this could be accomplished by implanting cells genetically modified to express tyrosine hydroxylase, the enzyme that converts tyrosine to L-DOPA, which in turn is converted by a nearly ubiquitous decarboxylase into the neurotransmitter dopamine. The feasibility of this approach has been demonstrated by transplanting tissue derived from the midbrain of human fetuses into the caudate and putamen, which produces long-lasting symptomatic improvement in a majority of grafted Parkinsons patients. To date, however, ethical, practical, and political considerations have limited use of fetal transplanted tissue. The effects of transplanting non-neuronal cells genetically modified in vitro to express tyrosine hydroxylase are also being studied in patients with Parkinsons disease, an approach that avoids some of these problems.An alternative strategy to treating Parkinsonian patients involves "neural grafts" using stem cells. Stem cells are self-renewing, multipotent progenitors with broad developmental potential. Instead of isolating mature dopaminergic neurons from the fetal midbrain for transplantation, this approach isolates neuronal progenitors at earlier stages of development, when these cells are actively proliferating. Critical to this approach is to prospectively identify and isolate stem cells that are multipotent and self-renewing, and to identify the growth factors needed to promote differentiation into the desired phenotype. The prospective identification and isolation of multipotent mammalian stem cells has already been accomplished, and several factors likely to be important in differentiation of midbrain precursors into dopamine neurons have been identified. Establishing the efficacy of this approach for Parkinsons patients would increase the possibility of its application to other neurodegenerative diseases.Although therapeutic strategies like these remain experimental, it is likely that some of them will succeed. Support for this explanation of hypokinetic movement disorders like Parkinsons disease comes from studies of monkeys in which degeneration of the dopaminergic cells of substantia nigra has been induced by the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine. Monkeys exposed to MPTP develop symptoms that are very similar to those of patients with Parkinsons disease. Furthermore, a second lesion placed in the subthalamic nucleus results in significant improvement in the ability of these animals to initiate movements, as would be expected based on the circuitry of the indirect pathway 